



EDITOR'S NOTE. 

In 1887, with the view of amplifying and com- 
pleting certain new doctrines which he had merely 
sketched in Beyond Good and Evil (see especially 
aphorism 260), Nietzsche published The Genealogy 
of Morals. This work is perhaps the least 
aphoristic, in form, of all Nietzsche's productions. 
For analytical power, more especially in those 
parts where Nietzsche examines the ascetic ideal, 
The Genealogy of Morals is unequalled by any 
other of his works; and, in the light which it 
throws upon the attitude of the ecclesiast to the 
man of resentment and misfortune, it is one of 
the most valuable contributions to sacerdotal 
psychology 



CONTENTS. 



FIRST ESSAY. 

FACE 

"Good and Evil," "Good and Bad" ■ - iS 

SECOND ESSAY. 
"Guilt," "Bad Conscience," and the Like 59 

THIRD ESSAY. 
What is the Meaning of Ascetic Ideals? - 119 

Peoples and Countries. Translated by J. M. 
Kennedy - - - - 213 



PREFACE. 



We are unknown^ we „kno3Kers,- ourselves to \ 
^ourselves : this has its own good reason. We | 
have never search^_fgr_pursdves — how should ' 
"ff~tKeir"com? to pass, that we should ev er ^nd 
ourselves ? Rightly has it been said : " Where 
your' treasure is, there will your heart be also." 
Our treasure is there, where stand the hives of 
our knowledge. It is to those hives that we are 
always striving; as born creatures of flight, and 
as the honey-gatherers of the spirit, we care 
really in our hearts only for one thing — to bring 
something " home to the hive ! " 

As far as the rest of life with its so-called 
" experiences " is concerned, which of us has even 
sufficient serious interest? or sufficient time? 
In our dealings with such points of life, we are, 
I fear, never properly to the point; to be 
precise, our heart is not there, and certainly not 
our ear. Rather like one who, delighting in a 
divine distraction, or sunken in the seas of his 
own soul, in whose ear the clock has just 
thundered with all its force its twelve strokes 
of noon, suddenly wakes up, and asks himself, 
" What has in point of fact just struck ? " so do 
we at times rub afterwards, as it were, our 
A 



2 PREFACE. 

puzzled ears, and ask in complete astonishment 

and complete embarrassment, "Through what 

have we in point of fact just lived ? " further, " Who 

are we in point of fact ? " and count, after they 

have struck, as I have explained, all the twelve 

throbbing beats of the clock of our experience, 

of our life, of our being — ah ! — and count wrong 

in the endeavour. Of necessity we remain 

; \strangers to ourselves, we understand ourselves 

^\ not, in ourselves we are bound to be mistaken, 

li for of us holds good to all eternity the motto, " Each 

1 one is the farthest away from himself" — as far 

' as ourselves are concerned we are not " knowers." 



My^ thoughts c once rning^ the^(»«ea:/i:7g2' of our 
moral prejudices — for they constitute the issue 
in this polemic — have their first, bald, and pro- 
visional expression in that collection of aphorisms 
entitled Human, all-too-Human, a Book for Free 
Minds, the writing of which was begun in 
Sorrento, during a winter which allowed me to 
gaze over the broad and dangerous territory 
through which my mind had up to that time 
wandered. This took place in the winter of 
1876-77 ; the thoughts themselves are older. 

They were in their substance already the same 
thoughts which I take up again in the following 
treatises : — we hope that they have derived 
benefit from the long interval, that they have 
grown riper, clearer, stronger, more complete. 
The fact, however, that I still cling to them even 



PREFACE. 3 

now, that in the meanwhile they have always 
held faster by each other, have, in fact, grown 
out of their original shape and into each other, 
all this strengthens in my mind the joyous 
confidence that they must have been originally 
neither separate disconnected capricious nor spor- 
adic phenomena, but have sprung from a common 
root, from a fundamental "^fiat" of knowledge, 
whose empire reached to the soul's depth, and 
that ever grew more definite in its voice, and 
more definite in its demands. That is the only 
state of affairs that is proper in the case of a 
philosopher. 

We have no right to be "disconnected" ; we must 
neither err " disconnectedly " nor strike the truth 
"disconnectedly." Rather with the necessity 
with which a tree bears its fruit, so do our 
thoughts, our values, our Yes's and No's and If's 
and Whether's, grow connected and interrelated, 
mutual witnesses of one will, one health, one 
kingdom, one sun — as to whether they are to 
your taste, these fruits of ours? — But what 
matters that to the trees? What matters that 
to us, us the philosophers ? 



Owing to a scrupulosity peculiar to myself, 
which I confess reluctantly, — it concerns indeed 
morality, — a scrupulosity, which manifests itself in 
my life at such an early period, with so much 
spontaneity, with so chronic a persistence and 
so keen an opposition to environment, epoch, 



4 PREFACE. 

precedent, and ancestry that I should have been 
almost entitled to style it my '' A priori"— my 
curiosity and my suspicion felt themselves betimes 
bound to halt at the question, of what in point 
of actual fact was the origin of our " Good ''^ndU)f 
our " Evil." Indeed, at-t4ie boyish age of thirteen 
the problem of the origin of Evil already haunted 
me: at an age "when games and God divide 
one's heart," I devoted to that problem my first 
childish attempt at the literary game, my first 
philosophic essay — and as regards my infantile 
solution of the problem, well, I gave q uite 
properly the honour to God, and made him^tB^- 
father of evil. Did my own " & priori " demand 
that precise solution from me ? that new, immoral, 
or at least "amoral" "d priori" and that "cate- 
gorical imperative" which was its voice (but oh! 
how hostile to the Kantian article, and how 
pregnant with problems !), to which since then 
I have given more and more attention, and 
indeed what is more than attention. Fortunately 
I soon learned to separate theological from 
moral prejudices, and I gave up looking fo_r a^ 
supernatural origin of evil. A certain amount 
of historical "a[n3" pHiIoiogical education, to say 
notHng~'6r an innate faculty of psychological 
discrimination par excellence succeeded in trans- 
forming almost immediately my original. problem 
into the following one :-^Under what conditions 
did Man invent for himself .those judgments 
of values, "Good" and "Evil"? And what 
intrinsic value do they possess in themselves^ 
Have they up to the present hindered or advanced 



PREFACE. 5 

human well-being ? Are they a symptom of the 
distress, impoverishment, and degeneration of 
Human Xife ? "" Or, conversely, is it in them that 
is'maiillested the fulness, the strengthj^ and the 
wiTT of Li fe," its "t^urag^ its 'self-confidence. Jts 
future? On this point I found and hazarded in 
rayTIfflid the most diverse answers, I established 
distinctions in periods, peoples, and castes, I 
became a specialist in my problem, and from my 
answers grew new questions, new investigations, 
new conjectures, new probabilities ; until at last 
I had a land of my own and a soil of my own, 
a whole secret world growing and flowering, like 
hidden gardens of whose existence no one could 
have an inkling — oh, how happy are we, we 
finders of knowledge, provided that we know how 
to keep silent sufficiently long. 



My first impulse to publish some of my 
hypotheses concerning the origin of morality I 
owe to a clear, well-written, and even precocious 
little book, in which a perverse and vicious kind 
of moral philosophy (your real English kind) was 
definitely presented to me for the first time; and 
this attracted me — with that magnetic attraction, 
inherent in that which is diametrically opposed and 
antithetical to one's own ideas. The title of the 
book was The Origin of the Moral Emotions ; its 
author, Dr. Paul R^e ; the year of its appearance, 
1877. I may almost say that I have never read 



6 PREFACE. 

anything in which every single dogma and con- 
clusion has called forth from me so emphatic a 
negation as did that book ; albeit a negation un- 
tainted by either pique or intolerance. I referred 
accordingly both in season and out of season in 
the previous works, at which I was then working, 
to the arguments of that book, not to refute them 

. for what have I got to do with mere refutations 

— but substituting, as is natural to a positive mind, 
for an improbable theory one which is more prob- 
able, and occasionally no doubt for one philosophic 
error another. In that early period I gave, as I 
have said, the first public expression to those 
theories of origin to which these essays are 
devoted, but with a clumsiness which I was the 
last to conceal from myself, for I was as yet 
cramped, being still without a special language for 
these special subjects, still frequently liable to 
relapse and to vacillation. To go into details, com- 
pare what I say in Human, all-too-Human, part i., 
about the parallel early history of Good and Evil, 
Aph. 45 (namely, their origin from the castes of 
the aristocrats and the slaves) ; similarly, Aph. 
136 et seq., concerning the birth and value of 
ascetic morality ; similarly, Aphs. 96, 99, vol. ii., 
Aph. 89, concerning the Morality of Custom, that 
far older and more original kind of morality which 
is toto ccelo different from the altruistic ethics (in 
which Dr. R^e, like all the English moral philo- 
sophers, sees the ethical " Thing-in-itself ") ; finally, 
Aph. 92. Similarly, Aph. 26 in Human, all-too- 
Human, part ii., and Aph. 112, the Dawn of 
Day, concerning the origin of Justice as a balance 



PREFACE. 7 

between persons of approximately equal power 
(equilibrium as the hypothesis of all contract, 
consequently of all law) ; similarly, concerning the 
origin of Punishment, Human, ail-too- Human, part 
ii., Aphs. 22, 23, in regard to which__the_^tfii:rent 
object is neither ess entiaT" n nr— oriflrinaJ-, (as Dr. 
KSeTKir^s : — rather is it that this object is only 
imported, under certain definite conditions, and 
always as something extra and additional). 



In reality I had set my heart at that time on 
something much more important than the nature of 
the theories of myself or others concerning the origin 
of morality (or, more precisely, the real function 
from my view of these theories was to point an 
end to which they were one among many means). 
The issucfbrme was the jvalue of^ morality, ana] 
on Jhat subject Lhad. to ,place_. myself . in a state" 
oLabfitraction, in which I was almost alone with 
my great teacher Schopenhauer, to whom that 
book, with all its passion and inherent contra- 
diction (for that book also was a polemic), turned 
for present help as though he were still alive^ 
The issue was, strangely enough, the value of the 
" unegoistic " instincts, the instincts of pity, self- 
denial, and self-sacrifice which Schopenhauer had 
so persistently painted in golden colours, deified 
and etherealised, that eventually they appeared 
to him, as it were, high and dry, as " intrinsic 
values in themselves," on the strength of which 



8 PREFACE. 

he uttered both to Life and to himself his own 
negation. But against these very instincts there 
voiced itself in my soul a more and more funda- 
mental mistrust, a scepticism that dug ever deeper 
and deeper : and in this very instinct I saw \h& great 
danger of mankind,its most sublime temptation and 
seduction — seduction to what ? to nothingness ? — 
Tin these very instincts I saw the beginning of the 
/ end, stability, the exhaustion that gazes back- 
( wards, the will turning against Life, the last illness 
announcing itself with its own mincing melancholy : 
I realised that the morality of pity which spread 
wider and wider, and whose grip infected even 
philosophers with its disease, was the most sinister 
symptom of our modern European civilisation ; I 
realised that it was the route along which that 
civilisation slid on its way to — a new Buddhism ? 
— a European Buddhism ? — Nihilism f This ex- 
aggerated estimation in which modern philosophers 
have held pity, is quite a new phenomenon : up to 
that time philosophers were absolutely unanimous 
as to the worthlessness of pity. I need only 
mention Plato, Spinoza, La Rochefoucauld, and 
Kant — four minds as mutually different as is 
possible, but united on one point ; their contempt 
of pity. 



6. 

This problem of the value of pity and of_Jthe 
P'&-BPiLality (I' am an opponent of the modern 
infamous emasculation of our emotions) seems at 
the first blush a mere isolated problem, a note^ih 



PREFACE. 



interrogation for itself ; he, however, who once halts 
at this problem, and learns how to put questions, 
will experience what I experienced : — a new and 
immense vista unfolds itself before him, a sense 
of potentiality seizes him like a vertigo, every 
species of doubt, mistrust, and fear springs up, 
the belief in morality, nay, in all morality, totters, 
— finally a new demand voices itself. Let us" 
speak out this new demand: we need a critique 
of moral values, the value of these Ualues is tor Thg 
'fl fst time to be called mto question — and for this 
purpose a^knavdedge.ia.necessary of the conditions 
and circumstances out of which these values grew, 
and untfenrfat d 'i lliey exueiieiice d"TEeir~evolurion 



and„tbeir distortion (morality as a result, as a 
symptom, as a mask, as Tartuttism, as disease, as 
a misunderstanding ; but also morality as a cause, 
as a remedy, as a stimulant, as a" fetter,"as a drug), 
especially as suchalcnowreageTiaslnelther existed 
up to the present time nor is even now generally 
clesired. The value of these " values " was taken 
for granted as an indisputable fact, which was 
beyond all question. No one has, up to the 
present, exhibited the faintest doubt or hesitation 
in judging the " good man " to be of a higher 
value than the '' evil man," of a higher value with 
regard specifically to human progress, utility, and 
prosperity generally, not forgetting the future. 
What? Suppose the converse were the truth! 
What ? Suppose there lurked in the " good man " 
a symptom of retrogression, such as a danger, a 
temptation, a poison, a narcotic, by means of which 
the present battened on the future \ More com- 



lO PREFACE. 



fortable and less risky perhaps than its opposite, 
but also pettier, meaner! So that morality 
would really be saddled with the guilt, if the 
maximum potentiality of the power and splendour of 
the human species were never to be attained? 
So that really morality would be the danger of 
dangers ? 



Enough, that after this vista had disclosed 
itself to me, I myself had reason to search for 
learned, bold, and industrious colleagues (I am 
doing it even to this very day). It means travers- 
ing with new clamorous questions, and at the same 
time with new eyes, the immense, distant, and 
completely unexplored land of morality — of a 
morality which has actually existed and been 
actually lived ! and is this not practically 
equivalent to first discovering that land ? If, in 
this context, I thought, amongst others, of the 
aforesaid Dr. Rde, I did so because I had no 
doubt that from the very nature of his questions 
he would be compelled to have recourse to a 
truer method, in order to obtain his answers. 
Have I deceived myself on that score ? I wished 
at all events to give a better direction of vision 
to an eye of such keenness, and such impartiality. 
I wished to direct him to the real history of 
morality, and to warn him, while there was yet 
time, against a world of English theories that 
culminated in the blue vacuum of heaven. Other 
colours, of course, rise immediately to one's mind 



PREFACE. 1 1 

as being a hundred times more potent than blue 
for a genealogy of morals : — for instance, grey, by 
which I mean authentic facts capable of definite 
proof and having actually existed, or, to put it 
shortly, the whole of that long hieroglyphic script 
(which is so hard to decipher) about the past 
history of human morals. This script was un- 
known to Dr. R^e ; but he had read Darwin : — 
and so in his philosophy the Darwinian beast and 
that pink of modernity, the demure weakling and 
dilettante, who " bites no longer," shake hands 
politely in a fashion that is at least instructive, 
the latter exhibiting a certain facial expression of 
refined and good-humoured indolence, tinged with 
a touch of pessimism and exhaustion ; as if it 
really did not pay to take all these things — I 
mean moral problems — so seriously. I, on_ the 
other han^think that there are no subjects which, 
pay better for being^_^Jtak£n.^-sedQusly ;_part of 
this payment is, that perhaps eventually they 
admit of being taken gaily. This gaiety indeed, 
or, to use my own language, this joyful wisdom, is 
a payment; a payment for a protracted, brave, 
laborious, and burrowing seriousness, which, it 
goes without saying, is the attribute of but a few. 
But on that day on which we say from the full- 
ness of our hearts, " Forward ! our old morality 
too is fit material for Comedyl' we shall have 
discovered a new plot, and a new possibility for 
the Dionysian drama entitled The Soul's Fate — 
and he will speedily utilise it, one can wager 
safely, he, the great ancient eternal dramatist of 
the comedy of our existence. 



12 PREFACE. 



8. 



If this writing be obscure to any individual, 
and jar on his ears, I do not think that it is 
necessarily I who am to blame. It is clear 
enough, on the hypothesis which I presuppose, 
namely, that the reader has first read my previous 
writings and has not grudged them a certain 
amount of trouble: it is not, indeed, a simple 
matter to get really at their essence. Take, for 
instance, my Zarathustra ; I allow no one to pass 
muster as knowing that book, unless every single 
word therein has at some time wrought in him a 
profound wound, and at some time exercised on 
him a profound enchantment: then and not till 
then can he enjoy the privilege of participating 
reverently in the halcyon element, from which 
that work is born, in its sunny brilliance, its 
distance, its spaciousness, its certainty. In other 
cases the aphoristic form produces difficulty, but 
this is only because this form is treated too 
casually. An aphorism properly coined and 
cast into its final mould is far from being 
" deciphered " as soon as it has been read ; on the 
contrary, it is then that it first requires to be ex- 
pounded — of course for that purpose an art of 
exposition is necessary. The third essay in this 
book provides an example of what is offered, of 
what in such cases I call exposition : an aphorism 
is prefixed to that essay, the essay itself is its 
commentary. Certainly one quality which nowa- 
days has been best forgotten — and that is 
why it will take some time yet for my writings 



PREFACE. 13 

to become readable — is essential in order to 
practise reading as an art — a quality for the 
exercise of which it is necessary to be a cow, 
and under no circumstances a modern man ! — 
rumination. 

Sils-Maria, Upper Engadine, 
July 1887. 



FIRST ESSAY. 
•GOOD AND EVIL." '«GOOD AND BAD." 



I. 

Those English psychologists, who up to the present 
are the only philosophers who are to be thanked 
for any endeavour to get as far as a history of 
the origin of morality — these men, I say, offer us 
in their own personalities no paltry problem ; — 
they even have, if I am to be quite frank about 
it, in their capacity of living riddles, an advantage 
over their books — they themselves are interesting ! 
These English psychologists — what do they really 
mean ? We always find them voluntarily or in- 
voluntarily at the same task of pushing to the 
front the partie honteuse of our inner world, and 
looking for the efficient, governing, and decisive - 
principle in that precise quarter where the in- 
tellectual self-respect of the race would be the 
most reluctant to find it (for example, in the vis 
inertice of habit, or in forgetfulness, or in a blind 
and fortuitous mechanism and association of ideas, 
or in some factor that is purely passive, reflex, 
molecular, or fundamentally stupid) — what is the 
real motive power which always impels these 
psychologists in precisely this direction ? Is it 
an instinct for human disparagement somewhat 
sinister, vulgar, and malignant, or perhaps incom- 
prehensible even to itself? or perhaps a touch 
of pessimistic jealousy, the mistrust of dis- 
illusioned idealists who have become gloomy, 



1 8 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

poisoned, and bitter? or a petty subconscious 
enmity and rancour against Christianity (and 
Plato), that has conceivably never crossed the 
threshold of consciousness? or just a vicious 
taste for those elements of life which are bizarre^ 
painfully paradoxical, mystical, and illogical ? or, as 
a final alternative, a dash of each of these motives 
— a little vulgarity, a little gloominess, a little 
anti-Christianity, a little craving for the necessary 
piquancy ? 

But I am told that it is simply a case of old 
frigid and tedious frogs crawling and hopping 
around men and inside men, as if they were as 
thoroughly at home there, as they would be in a 
swamp. 

I am opposed to this statement, nay, I do not 
believe it ; and if, in the impossibility of knowledge, 
one is permitted to wish, so do I wish from my 
heart that just the converse metaphor should 
apply, and that these analysts with their psycho- 
logical microscopes should be, at bottom, brave, 
proud, and magnanimous animals who know how 
to bridle both their hearts and their smarts, and 
have specifically trained themselves to sacrifice 
what is desirable to what is true, any truth in fact^ 
even the simple, bitter, ugly, repulsive, unchristian, 
and immoral truths — for there are truths of that 
description. ^^ 



All honour, then, to the noble spirits who would 
fain dominate these historians of morality. But 
it is certainly a pity that they lack the historiccf 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." ig 

sense itself, that they themselves, ar^ quite rie.'^qriherihj 
by all the beneficent spirits of histo ry. The 
whole train of their thought runs, as was always 
the ,_way__5r oldTasEiohecf " pBirosopHefsP^ori 
thoroughly unhist6ncaniH5sT"'thef6~ is n5' doubt 
on~ THI5''poinl:r~ TTiS ~ crass ineptitude of their 
genealogy of morals is immediately apparent 
when the question arises of ascertaining the origin * 
of the idea and judgment of " good." " Man 
had originally," so speaks their decree, "praised 
and calle d ' good ' altciiiatic_acts_lrom -the stand- 
point of those on whom they were conferred, that 
is, those_lQjffiJiOJ3i_theyjyere «i'^«</^_subsequently 
the origin of this praise was forgotten, and altru- 
istic acts, siniply 'because, as a sheer matter of 
habit, they were praised as g ood, came also Jp be 
felt asgood;; — as though they contained in them- 
selves some intrinsic goodness." The thing is 
obvious : — this initial derivation contains already 
all the typical and idiosyncratic traits of the 
English psychologists — we have " utility," " for- 
getting/' " habit," and finally " error," the whole 
assemblage forming the basis of a system of values, 
on which the higher man has up to the present 
prided himself as though it were a kind of privi- 
lege of man in general. This pride must be 
brought low, this system of values^^Ki^it lose its 
values : is that attained ? 

Now the first argument that comes ready to 
my hand is that the real homestead of the concept 
" good " is sought and located in the wrong place : 
the judgment " good " did not originate among 
those to whom goodness was shown. Much 



20 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

rather has it been the good themselves, that is, 
the aristocratic, the powerful, the high-stationed, 
the high-minded, who have felt that they them- 
selves were good, and that their actions were good, 
that is to say of the first order, in contradistinc- 
tion to all the low, the low-minded, the vulgar, 
and the plebeian. It was out of this pathos 
of distance that they first arrogated the right 
to create values for their own profit, and to coin 
the names of such values : what had they to 
do with utility? The standpoint of utility is 
as alien and as inapplicable as it could possibly 
be, when we have to deal with so volcanic an 
effervescence of supreme values, creating and 
demarcating as they do a hierarchy within them- 
selves : it is at this juncture that one arrives at 
an appreciation of the contrast to that tepid 
temperature, which is the presupposition on which 
every combination of worldly wisdom and every 
calculation of practical expediency is always 
based — and not for one occasional, not for one 
exceptional instance, but chronically. The] 
pathos of nobility and distance, as I have said, 
the chronic and despotic esprit de corps and 
fundamental instinct of a higher dominant race 
coming into association with a meaner race, an 
" under race," this is the origin of the antithesis 
of good and badj 

(The masters' right of giving names goes so 
far that it is permissible to look upon language 
itself as the expression of the power of the 
masters : they say " this is that, and that," they 
seal finally every object and every event with a 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 21 

sound, and thereby at the same time take posses- 
sion of it.) It is because of this origin that the 
word " good " is far from having any necessary 
connection with altruistic acts, in accordance witlW 
the superstitious belief of these moral philosophers.' 
On the contrary, it is on the occasion of the 
decay of aristocratic values, that the antitheses 
between " egoistic " and " altruistic '' presses more 
and more heavily on the human conscience — it 
is, to use my own language, the herd instinct which 
finds in this antithesis an expression in many ways. 
And even then it takes a considerable time for 
this instinct to become sufficiently dominant, for 
the valuation to be inextricably dependent on 
this antithesis (as is the case in contemporary 
Europe) ; for to-day that prejudice is predominant, 
which, acting even now with all the intensity of 
an obsession and brain disease, holds that " moral," 
"altruistic," and " d^sint&ess^" are concepts of 
equal value. 



In the second place, quite apart from the fact 
that this hypothesis as to the genesis of the value 
" good " cannot be historically upheld, it suffers 
from an inherent psychological contradiction. 
The ,jitjlity;^j^ ^tjruistic^conduct— has- p re su mably 

origin h ap hprnmp fnro-nfUjuj — But in what con- 
ceivable way is this forgetting ..po^sitde} Has 
perchance the utility of such conduct ceased at 
some given moment? The contrary is the case. 
Thjsjitjljty j^gg ra.thpr hppn experienced every day 



22 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

at all times, and is consequently a feature that 
oUtalns a new and regular emphasis with every 
fresh day ; it follows that, so far from vanishing 
from The consciousness, so far mdeed from^ being 
forgotten, it must necessarily become impresse3~ 
on the consciousness with ever-increasing distmet- 
ness. How much more logical is that contrary 
theory (it is not the truer for that) which is repre- 
sented, for instance, by Herbert Spencer, who places 
the concept " good " as essentially similar to the 
concept " useful," " purposive," so that in the 
judgments " good " and " bad " mankind is simply 
summarising and investing with a sanction its 
unforgotten and unforgettable experiences concern- 
ing the " useful-purposive " and the " mischievous- 
non-purposive." According to this theory, " good" 
is the attribute of that which has previously shown 
itself useful ; and so is able to claim to be con- 
sidered " valuable in the highest degree," " valu- 
able in itself." This method of explanation is 
also, as I have said, wrong, but at any rate 
the explanation itself is coherent, and psycho- 
logically tenable. 



Th£j[uide^pjt jvhichjfirst put me on the right 
track was this question— what is the true etymo;^ 
logical jignificance of the various symbols for the 
idea " good " which haye^been-coinedin the various 
languages ? I then found that they all led back toT 
the same evolution of the same idea — that every- 
where " aristocrat," " noble " (in the social sense), is 
the root idea, out of which have necessarily devel- 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 23 

Oped " good " in the sense of " with aristocratic 
soul," " noble," in the sense of " with a soul of high 
calibre," " with a privileged soul " — a development 
which invariably runs parallel with that other 
evolution by which "vulgar," "plebeian," "low," 
are made to change finally into " bad." t The 
most eloquent proof of this last contention is 
the German word ^^ schlecht" itself: this word is 
identical with " schlicht" — (compare " schlechtweg" 
and " schlechterdings ") — which, originally and 
as yet without any sinister innuendo, simply 
denoted the plebeian man in contrast to the aristo- 
cratic man. It is at the sufficiently late period of 
the Thirty Years' War that this sense becomes 
changed to the sense now current. From the 
standpoint of the Genealogy of Morals this dis- 
covery seems to be substantial : the lateness of it 
is to be attributed to the retarding influence exer- 
cised in the modern world by democratic prejudice 
in the sphere of all questions of origin. This ex- 
tends, as will shortly be shown, even to the province 
of natural science and physiology, vthlchprima facie 
is the most objective. The extent of the mischief 
which is caused by this prejudice (once it is free of 
all trammels except those of its own malice), parti- 
cularly to Ethics and History, is shown by the 
notorious case of Buckle : it was in Buckle that 
that plebeianism of the modern spirit, which is of 
English origin, broke out once again from its 
malignant soil with all the violence of a slimy 
volcano, and with that salted, rampant, and vulgar 
eloquence with which up to the present time all 
volcanoes have spoken. 



24 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

s. 

With regard to our problem, which can justly 
be called an intimate problem, and which elects 
to appeal to only a limited number of ears: it 
is of no small interest to ascertain that in those 
words and roots which denote " good " we catch 
glimpses of that arch-trait, on the strength of 
which the aristocrats feel themselves to be beings 
of a higher order than their fellows. Indeed, they 
call themselves in perhaps the most frequent 
instances simply after their superiority in power 
{e.g. " the powerful," " the lords," " the com- 
manders "), or after the most obvious sign of their 
superiority, as for example " the rich," " the pos- 
sessors " (that is the meaning of arva_i and the 
Iranian and Slav languages correspond). But 
they also call themselves after some characteristic 
idiosyncrasy ; and this is the case which now 
concerns us. They name themselves, for instance, 
" the truthful " : this is first done by the Greek 
nobility whose mouthpiece is found in Theognis, 
the Megarian poet. The word iaQXo<i, which is 
coined for the purpose, signifies etymologically 
" one who is" who has reality, who is real, who is 
true ; and then with a subjective twist, the " true," 
as the " truthful " : at this stage in the evolution 
of the idea, it becomes the motto and party cry of 
the nobility, and quite completes the transition to 
the meaning " noble," so as to place outside the 
pale the lying, vulgar man, as Theognis conceives 
and portrays him — till finally the word after the 
decay of the nobility is left to delineate psycho- 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 25 

logical noblesse, and becomes as it were ripe and 
mellow. In the word /ca«o? as in SetXos (the 
plebeian in contrast to the cuya66<s) the cowardice 
is emphasised. This affords perhaps an inkling 
on what lines the etymological origin of the very 
ambiguous ayaOo^ is to be investigated. In the 
Latin malus (which I place side by side with 
fjLe\a<s) the vulgar man can be distinguished as 
the dark-coloured, and above all as the black- 
haired {" kic niger est"), as the pre- Aryan in- 
habitants of the Italian soil, whose complexion 
formed the clearest feature of distinction from the 
dominant blondes, namely, the Aryan conquering 
race : — at any rate Gaelic has afforded me the exact 
analogue — Fin (for instance, in the name Fin-Gal), 
the distinctive word of the nobility, finally — good, 
noble, clean, but originally the blonde-haired man 
in contrast to the dark black-haired aboriginals. 
The Celts, if I may make a parenthetic statement, 
were throughout a blonde race; and it is wrong 
to connect, as Virchow still connects, those traces 
of an essentially dark-haired population which 
are to be seen on the more elaborate ethno- 
graphical maps of Germany with any Celtic 
ancestry or with any admixture of Celtic blood : 
in this context it is rather the pre-Aryan population 
of Germany which surges up to these districts. 
(The same is true substantially of the whole of 
Europe : in point of fact, the subject race has 
finally again obtained the upper hand, in com- 
plexion and the shortness of the skull, and perhaps 
in the intellectual and social qualities. Who 
can guarantee that modern democracy, still more 



26 ' THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

jHodern anarchy, and indeed that tendency to the 
" Commune," the most primitive form of society, 
which is now common to all the Socialists in 
Europe, does not in its real essence signify a 
monstrous reversion — and that the conquering 
and master race — the Aryan race, is not also 
becoming inferior physiologically?) I believe that 
I can explain the Latin bonus as the "warrior": 
my hypothesis is that I am right in deriving bonus 
from an older duonus (compare bellum = duellum 
= duen-lum, in which 'the word duonus appears to 
me to be contained). Bonus accordingly as the 
man of discord, of variance, " entzweiung " {duo), as 
the warrior : one sees what in ancient Rome " the 
good" meant for a man. Must not our actual 
German word gut mean " the godlike, the man of 
godlike race " ? and be identical with the national 
name (originally the nobles' name) of the Goths ? 
The grounds for this supposition do not apper- 
tain to this work. 



6. 

fAlDove all, there is no exception (though there 
are opportunities for exceptions) to this rule, that 
the idea of politi cal supe riority, al ways resok es 
itsel f into the idea of psycho logical superioritg t 
in those cases where the highest caste is at the 
same time Xh&priestly caste, and in accordance with 
its general characteristics confers on itself the 
privilege of a title which alludes specifically to 
its priestly function^ It is in these cases, for 
instance, that " clean^ and " unclean " confront 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 27 

each other fJOTthe first time as badges of class 
distigstion^-here again" there develops a"j[ood" 
and a " bad," in a sense~wIiicK"Tias ceased to be 
merely social. Moreover, care should be taken 
not 't6~take these ideas of " clean " and " unclean " 
too seriously, too broadly, or too symbolically : 
all the ideas of ancient man have, on the contrary, 
got to be understood in their initial stages, in a 
sense which is, to an almost inconceivable extent, 
crude, coarse, physical, and narrow, and above all 
essentially unsymbolical. The " clean man " is 
originally only a man who washes himself, who 
abstains from certain foods which are conducive 
to skin diseases, who does not sleep with the 
unclean women of the lower classes, who has a 
horror of blood — not more, not much more ! On 
the other hand, the very nature of a priestly 
aristocracy shows the reasons why just at such 
an early juncture there should ensue a really 
dangerous sharpening and intensification of 
opposed values : it is, in fact, through these 
opposed values that gulfs are cleft in the social 
plane, which a veritable Achilles of free thought 
would shudder to cross. There is from the 
outset a certain diseased taint in such sacerdotal 
aristocracies, and in the habits which prevail in 
such societies — habits which, averse as they are 
to action, constitute a compound of introspection 
and explosive emotionalism, as a result of which 
there appears that introspective morbidity and 
neurasthenia, which adheres almost inevitably to 
all priests at all times : with regard, however, to 
the remedy which they themselves have invented 



28 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

for this disease — the philosopher has no option 
but to state, that it has proved itself in its effects 
a hundred times more dangerous than the disease, 
from which it should have been the deliverer. 
Humanity itself is still diseased from the effects 
of the naivetds of this priestly cure. Take, for 
instance, certain kinds of diet (abstention from 
flesh), fasts, sexual continence, flight into the 
wilderness (a kind of Weir- Mitchell isolation, 
though of course without that system of exces- 
sive feeding and fattening which is the most 
efficient antidote to all the hysteria of the ascetic 
ideal) ; consider too the whole metaphysic of the 
priests, with its war on the senses, its enerva- 
tion, its hair-splitting ; consider its self-hypnotism 
on the fakir and Brahman principles (it uses 
Brahman as a glass disc and obsession), and that 
climax which we can understand only too well 
of an unusual satiety with its panacea of nothing- 
ness (or God : — the demand for a unto mystica 
with God is the demand of the Buddhist for 
nothingness, Nirvana — and nothing else !). In 
sacerdotal societies every element is on a more 
dangerous scale, not merely cures and remedies, 
but also pride, revenge, cunning, exaltation, love, 
ambition, virtue, morbidity :■ — further, it can fairly] 
be stated that it is on the soil of this essentially\ 
dangerous form of human society, the sacerdotal 
form, that man really becomes for the first time 
an interesting animal, that it is in this form that 
the soul of man has in a higher sense attained 
depths and become evil — and those are the two 
fundamental forms of the superiority which up 



"GOOD AND EVIL," " GOOD AND BAD." 29 

to the present man has exhibited over every other 
animal. { 

The reader will have already surmised with 
what ease the priestly mode of valuation can 
branch off from the knightly aristocratic mode, 
and then develop into the very antithesis of the 
latter: special impetus is given to this opposition, 
by every occasion when the castes of the priests 
and warriors confront each other with mutual 
jealousy and cannot agree over the prize. The 
knightly-aristocratic " values " are based on a care- 
ful cult of the physical, on a flowering, rich, and 
even effervescing healthiness, that goes considerably 
beyond what is necessary for maintaining life, on 
war, adventure, the chase, the dance, the tourney — 
on everything, in fact, which is contained in strong, 
free, and joyous action. The priestly-aristocratic 
mode of valuation is — we have seen — based on 
other hypotheses : it is bad enough for this class 
when it is a question of war ! Yet the priests are, 
as is notorious, the worst enemies — why ? Because 
they are the weakest. Their weakness causes 
their hate to expand into a monstrous and 
sinister shape, a shape which is most crafty and 
most poisonous. The really great haters in the! 
history of the world have always been priests, who 
are also the cleverest haters — in comparison with 
the cleverness of priestly revenge, every other piece 
of cleverness is practically negligiblej Human 
history would be too fatuous for anything were 
it not for the cleverness imported into it by the 



30 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

weak — take at once the most important instance. 
All the world's efforts against the "aristocrats," 
the " mighty," the " masters," the " holders of 
power," are negligible by comparison with what 
has been accomplished against those classes by 
the Jews — the Jews, that priestly nation which 
eventually realised that the one method of effect- 
ing satisfaction on its enemies and tyrants was by 
means of a radical transvaluation of values, which 
was at the same time an act of the cleverest 
revenge. Yet the method was only appropriate 
to a nation of priests, to a nation of the most 
jealously nursed priestly revengefulness. It was 
the Jews who, in opposition to the aristocratic equa- 
tion (good = aristocratic = beautiful = happy = 
loved by the gods), dared with a terrifying logic 
to suggest the contrary equation, and indeed to 
maintain with the teeth of the most profound 
hatred (the hatred of weakness) this contrary 
equation, namely, " the wretched are alone the 
good ; the poor, the weak, the lowly, are alone 
the good ; the suffering, the needy, the sick, the 
loathsome, are the only ones who are pious, the 
only ones who are blessed, for them alone is 
salvation — but you, on the other hand, you 
aristocrats, you men of power, you are to all 
eternity the evil, the horrible, the covetous, the 
insatiate, the godless ; eternally also shall you be 
the unblessed, the cursed, the damned ! " We 
know who it was who reaped the heritage of this 
Jewish transvaluation. In the context of the 
monstrous and inordinately fateful initiative 
which the Jews have exhibited in connection with 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 3 1 

this most fundamental of all declarations of war, I 
remember the passage which came to my pen on 
another occasion {Beyond Good and Evil, Aph. 
195) — that it was, in fact, with the Jews that 
the revolt of the slaves begins in the sphere of 
morals; that revolt which has behind it a history 
of two millennia, and which at the present day has 
only moved out of our sight, because it — has 
achieved victory. 

8, 

But you understand this not? You have no 
eyes for a force which hcis taken two thousand 
years to achieve victory? — There is nothing 
wonderful in this : all lengthy processes are hard 
to see and to realise. But this is what took 
place : from the trunk of that tree of revenge and 
hate, Jewish hate, — that most profound and 
sublime hate, which creates ideals and changes 
old values to new creations, the like of which has 
never been on earth, — there grew a phenomenon 
which was equally incomparable, a new love, the 
most profound and sublime of all kinds of love ; 
— and from what other trunk could it have 
grown ? But beware of supposing that this love 
has soared on its upward growth, as in any way 
a real negation of that thirst for revenge, as an 
antithesis to the Jewish hate ! No, the contrary- 
is the truth ! This love grew out of that hate, as its 
crown, as its triumphant crown, circling wider and 
wider amid the clarity and fulness of the sun, and 
pursuing in the very kingdom of light and height 
its goal of hatred, its victory, its spoil, its strategy, 



32 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

with the same intensity with which the roots of 
that tree of hate sank into everything which was 
deep and evil with increasing stability and in- 
creasing desire. This Jesus of Nazareth, the 
incarnate gospel of love, this " Redeemer " bringing 
salvation and victory to the poor, the sick, the 
sinful — was he not really temptation in its most 
sinister and irresistible form, temptation to take 
the tortuous path to those very Jewish values and 
those very Jewish ideals ? Has not Israel really 
obtained the final goal of its sublime revenge, by 
the tortuous paths of this " Redeemer," for all 
that he might pose as Israel's adversary and 
Israel's destroyer? Is it not due to the black 
magic of a really great policy of revenge, of a 
far-seeing, burrowing revenge, both acting and 
calculating with slowness, that Israel himself 
must repudiate before all the world the actual 
instrument of his own revenge and nail it to the 
cross, so that all the world — that is, all the enemies 
of Israel — could nibble without suspicion at this 
very bait ? Could, moreover, any human mind with 
all its elaborate ingenuity invent a bait that was 
more truly dangerous} Anything that was even 
equivalent in the power of its seductive, intoxicat- 
ing, defiling, and corrupting influence to that 
symbol of the holy cross, to that awful paradox 
of a " god on the cross," to that mystery of the 
unthinkable, supreme, and utter horror of the 
self-crucifixion of a god for the salvation of man ? 
It is at least certain that sub hoc signo Israel, with 
its revenge and transvaluation of all values, has 
up to the present always triumphed again over 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 33 

all other ideals, over all more aristocratic 
ideals. 

9- 

" But why do you talk of nobler ideals ? Let 
us submit to the facts ; that the people have 
triumphed — or the slaves, or the populace, or the 
herd, or whatever name you care to give them — 
if this has happened through the Jews, so be it ! 
In that case no nation ever had a greater mission 
in the world's history. The ' masters ' have bee^ 
done away with ; the morality of the vulgar man 
has triumphed. This triumph may also be called 
a blood - poisoning (it has mutually fused the 
races) — I do not dispute it; but there is no 
doubt but that this intoxication has succeededj 
The ' redemption ' of the human race (that is, 
from the masters) is progressing swimmingly ; 
everything is obviously becoming Judaised, or 
Christianised, or vulgarised (what is there in the 
words?). It seems impossible to stop the 
course of this poisoning through the whole body 
politic of mankind — but its tempo and pace may 
from the present time be slower, more delicate, 
quieter, more discreet — there is time enough. In 
view of this context has the Church nowadays any 
necessary purpose ? has it, in fact, a right to live ? 
Or could man get on without it? Qucsritur. 
It seems that it fetters and retards this tendency, 
instead of accelerating it. Well, even that might 
be its utility. The Church certainly is a crude 
and boorish institution, that is repugnant to an 
intelligence with any pretence at delicacy, to a 



34 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

really modern taste. Should it not at any rate 
learn to be somewhat more subtle? It alienates 
nowadays, more than it allures. Which of us 
would, forsooth, be a freethinker if there were no 
Church ? It is the Church which repels us, not 
its poison — apart from the Church we like the 
poison." This is the epilogue of a freethinker to 
my discourse, of an honourable animal (as he has 
given abundant proof), and a democrat to boot; 
he had up to that time listened to me, and could 
not endure my silence, but for me, indeed, with 
regard to this topic there is much on which to 
be silent. 

lO. 

I The revolt of the slaves in morals begins in the 
very principle of resentment becoming creatiye^nS" 
givinglDirth to values — -a,, resentment __exg,erijgDced^ 
bj^ creatures who, deprived as they are of the 
proper outlet of action, are forced to find their_ _ 
compensation in an imaginary revenge, j Whi]e _ 
every aristocratic morality s prings from a tri- 
umphant affirmation^ of . its own de mands, tBe^ 
sla ve morality says " no " from the very outsetT 5~' 
what is " outside itself," " different from itself, 
and "not itself": and this "^"rio " is its creative^ 
deed. ' This volte-face of thS valuing stan3- 
point — this___^wiii2;^Zg.. ..gravitation to the ob- 
jective instead of back to the subjecHVe — 
is Typical of " resentment " : the "slave- Iflorellit3^^ 
requires as the ^condition of its existence "arT 
external, and objective world, to employ physio- 
logical terminology, it requires objectiv e stimu li 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 35 

tn he. capable of a ctioa— aL-all— [^i ts action i s 
fundam ental ly a reactio n. The contrary is the ' 
case when we come to the aristocrat's system of 
values : it acts and grows spontaneously, it jmerely 
seeks its antithesis in order to pronounce a niore 
grateful and exulHSE3y^' jolts own self; — its 
negative conception, "low," " vulgarT* " " bad," is 
merely a pale late-born foil in comparison with its 
positive and fundamental conception (saturated as 
it is with life and passion), of " we aristocrats, we 
good ones, we beautiful ones, we happy ones.^ 

When the aristocratic morality goes astray and 
commits sacrilege on reality, this is limited to that 
particular sphere with which it is not sufficiently 
acquainted — a sphere, in fact, from the real 
knowledge of which it disdainfully defends itself. 
It misjudges, in some cases, the sphere which it 
despises, the sphere of the common vulgar man 
and the low people : on the other hand, due weight 
should be given to the consideration that in any 
case the mood of contempt, of disdain, of super- 
ciliousness, even on the supposition that it falsely 
portrays the object of its contempt, will always 
be far removed from that degree of falsity which 
will always characterise the attacks — in effigy, of 
course — of the vindictive hatred and revengeful- 
ness of the weak in onslaughts on their enemies. 
In point of fact, there is in contempt too strong 
an admixture of nonchalance, of casualness, of 
boredom, of impatience, even of personal exultation, 
for it to be capable of distorting its victim into a 
real caricature or a real monstrosity. Attention 
again should be paid to the almost benevolent 



36 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

nuances which, for instance, the Greek nobility 
imports into all the words by which it distinguishes 
the common people from itself; note how con- 
tinuously a kind of pity, care, and consideration 
imparts its honeyed flavour, until at last almost all 
the words which are applied to the vulgar man 
survive finally as expressions for "unhappy," 
" worthy of pity " (compare ieCKd<s, SeiKaio';, irovijpo^, 
IwxOrjpo^ ; the latter two names really denoting 
the vulgar man as labour-slave and beast of burden) 
— and how, conversely, " bad," " low," " unhappy " 
have never ceased to ring in the Greek ear with 
a tone in which " unhappy " is the predominant 
note: this is a heritage of the old noble 
aristocratic morality, which remains true to itself 
even in contempt (let philologists remember 
the sense in which oi^vpo^, dvoX^oi;, rKriimv, 
Bvcrrvxelv, ^v/Mpopd used to be employed). The 
" well-born " simply /eU themselves the " happy " ; 
they did not have to manufacture their happiness 
artificially through looking at their enemies, or in 
cases to talk and lie themselves into happiness (as 
is the custom with all resentful men); and 
similarly, complete men as they were, exuberant 
with strength, and consequently necessarily ener- 
getic, they were too wise to dissociate happi- 
ness from action — activity becomes in their 
minds necessarily counted as happiness (that is 
the etymology of ev irp&TTeiv) — all in sharp con- 
trast to the " happiness " of the weak and the 
oppressed, with their festering venom and malignity, 
among whom happiness appears essentially as 
a narcotic, a deadening, a quietude, a peace, a 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 37 

"Sabbath," an enervation of the mind and re- 
laxation of the limbs, — in short, a purely passive 
phenomenon. While the aristocratic man livedi 
in confidence and openness with himself (yevvaio';, 
" noble-born," emphasises the nuance " sincere," 
and perhaps also " naif"), the resentful man, on 
the other hand, is neither sincere nor naif, nor 
honest and candid with himself^ His soul squints ; 
his mind loves hidden crannies, tortuous paths and 
back-doors, everything secret appeals to him as 
Ais world, Ms safety, Ais balm ; he is past master 
in silence, in not forgetting, in waiting, in provi- 
sional self-depreciation and self-abasement. A race 
of such resentful men will of necessity eventually 
prove more prudent than any aristocratic race, it 
will honour prudence on quite a distinct scale, 
as, in fact, a paramount condition of existence, while 
prudence among aristocratic men is apt to be 
tinged with a delicate flavour of luxury and 
refinement ; so among them it plays nothing like 
so integral a part as that complete certainty of 
function of the governing unconscious instincts, or 
as indeed a certain lack of prudence, such as 
a vehement and valiant charge, whether against 
danger or the enemy, or as those ecstatic bursts 
of rage, love, reverence, gratitude, by which at all 
times noble souls have recognised each other. 
When the resentment of the aristocratic man 
manifests itself, it fulfils and exhausts itself in an 
immediate reaction, and consequently instills no 
venom : on the other hand, it never manifests itself 
at all in countless instances, when in the case of 
the feeble and weak it would be inevitablej An 



38 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

inabilit y to take seriously for any I gngth of time 
their e nemies, their disasters, th eir misdeeds^^^^^^ ^ 
"mTTe srVn of thejull_strong n atures who po ssess_a_^ 
superfluity of moulding plastic force^t hat heals c om- 
pleitely and pro duces forget fulngssj^j^oodexaniple^ 
offfi sTn the modern world is Jlimbeau ^who had n o 
memory f or any insults a nd meannesses whic h wer e 
practised_on_him, and wjio_wa§_j3n]y:-incapahlpi nf 
forgiving because he forgot. Such a man indeed 
shakes off with a shrug many a worm which 
would have buried itself in another ; it is only in 
characters like these that we see the possibility 
(supposing, of course, that there is such a possibility 
in the world) of the real " love of one's enemies." 
What respect for his enemies is found, forsooth, 
in an aristocratic man — and such a reverence is 
already a bridge to love ! He insists on having 
his enemy to himself as his distinction. He 
tolerates no other enemy but a man in whose 
character there is nothing to despise and much 
to honour ! On the other hand, imagine the 
"enemy" as the resentful man conceives hjm — 
and it is here exactly that we see his work, his 
creativeness ; he has conceived " the evil enemy," 
the " evil one," and indeed that is the root idea 
from which he now evolves as a contrasting and 
corresponding figure a " good one," himself — his 
very self! 

II. 

I The method of this man is quite contrary to 
that of the aristocratic man, who conceives the 
root idea " good " spontaneously and straight 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 39 

away, that is to say, out of himself, and from that 
material then creates for himself a concept of 
" bad "J_J Th.\s^^sd"-.J^i aristocia.tlc^.oti§ia^_and. . 
that " evil " out of the cauldron of unsatisfied hatred 



— -the tormer an imitation, an " extra," an additional 
nuance; the lafterJ'oiTthe otli«'Tian37tKe~original, 
the' "beginning, the ^senlial"act in the conception] 
ti f^" srave-mo rality— -thgse . two ffiQld§.,'l.badI'^ad„ 
"evil," how "great a ^ig^ence do they, mark, in 
spite of the fact that they have an identical con- 
tr ary in fhe idea '~good.^ But the idea " good " 
is not the same : much rather let the question be 
asked, " Who is re ally evil according to the mean- 
ing of the m oJEalitv .of- resentment ? " In all 
sternness let it be answered thus -.—just the good 
man of the other morality, just the aristocrat, the 
powerfuFone^the one who rules, but who is dis- 
torted by the venomous eye of resentfulness, into 
a new colour, a jiew si^jficatioii,. a new appear- 
.ance. _ J his particular point we would be the last 
to deny : the man who learnt to know those 
" good " ones only as enemies, learnt at the same 
time not to know them only as ^^ evil enemies" 
and the same men who inter pares were kept so 
rigorously in bounds through convention, respect, 
custom, and gratitude, though much more through 
mutual vigilance and jealousy inter pares, these 
men who in their relations with each other find so 
many new ways of manifesting consideration, self- 
control, delicacy, loyalty, pride, and friendship, 
these men are in reference to what is outside 
their circle (where the foreign element, a 
foreign country, begins), not much better than 



40 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

beasts of prey, which have been let loose. They 
enjoy there freedom from all social control, they 
feel that in the wilderness they can give vent with 
impunity to that tension which is produced by 
enclosure and imprisonment in the peace of society, 
they revert to the innocence of the beast-of-prey 
conscience, like jubilant monsters, who perhaps 
come from a ghastly bout of murder, arson, rape, 
and torture, with bravado and a moral equanimity, 
as though merely some wild student's prank had 
been played, perfectly convinced that the poets 
have now an ample theme to sing and celebrate. 
It is impossible not to recognise at the core of all 
these aristocratic races the beast of prey; the 
magnificent blonde brute, avidly rampant for spoil 
and victory ; this hidden core needed an outlet 
from time to time, the beast must get loose again, 
must return into the wilderness — the Roman, 
Arabic, German, and Japanese nobility, the 
Homeric heroes, the Scandinavian Vikings, are 
all alike in this need. It is the aristocratic races 
who have left the idea " Barbarian " on all the 
tracks in which they have marched ; nay, a con- 
sciousness of this very barbarianism, and even a 
pride in it, manifests itself even in their highest 
civilisation (for example, when Pericles says to 
his Athenians in that celebrated funeral oration, 
" Our audacity has forced a way over every 
land and sea, rearing everywhere imperishable 
memorials of itself {qx good -axiA for evil"). This 
audacity of aristocratic races, mad, absurd, and 
spasmodic as may be its expresssion ; the incalcul- 
able and fantastic nature of their enterprises, — 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 41 

Pericles sets in special relief and glory the padvfiia 
of the Athenians, their nonchalance and contempt 
for safety, body, life, and comfort, their awful joy 
and intense delight in all destruction, in all the 
ecstasies of victory and cruelty, — all these features 
become crystallised, for those who suffered thereby 
in the picture of the " barbarian," of the " evil 
enemy," perhaps of the " Goth " and of the 
" Vandal." The profound, icy mistrust which the 
German provokes, as soon as he arrives at power, — 
even at the present time, — is always still an after- 
math of that inextinguishable horror with which 
for whole centuries Europe has regarded the wrath 
of the blonde Teuton beast (although between the 
old Germans and ourselves there exists scarcely a 
psychological, let alone a physical, relationship). 
I have once called attention to the embarrassment 
of Hesiod, when he conceived the series of social 
ages, and endeavoured to express them in gold, 
silver, and bronze. He could only dispose of the 
contradiction, with which he was confronted, by 
the Homeric world, an age magnificent indeed, 
but at the same time so awful and so violent, by 
making two ages out of one, which he henceforth 
placed one behind each other — first, the age of the 
heroes and demigods, as that world had remained 
in the memories of the aristocratic families, who 
found therein their own ancestors ; secondly, the 
bronze age, as that corresponding age appeared to 
the descendants of the oppressed, spoiled, ill- 
treated, exiled, enslaved ; namely, as an age of 
bronze, as I have said, hard, cold, terrible, without 
feelings and without conscience, crushing every- 



42 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

thing, and bespattering everything with blood. 
Grantedjhe truth of the theory now belie_ yed to_ 
belrue, that the very essence^ of all civilisat ion is to 

I train ^^"o'f man, the beast of prey, a ta me and 

civilised animal, a domesticatgd animal, it fol lows 

indubitably that we must regard as ..the real tools 

Vof civilisation all Jhose instincts of reac ti on and 

resentment, by the help of which the . Aristocratic. 

, races, together with their ideals,, were, J5«aUjj-de.- 
graded ^nd overpoweredj though that has not 
yet come to be synonymous with saying that the 
bearers of those tools also represented the civilisa- 
tion. It is rather the contrary that is not only 
probable — nay, it is palpable to-day ; these bearers 
of vindictive instincts that have to be bottled up, 
these descendants of all European and non- 
European slavery, especially of the pre-Aryan 
population — these people, I say, represent the 
decline of humanity ! j^hese " tools of civilisa- 
tion " are a disgrace to humanity, and constitute 
in reality more of an argument against civilisation, 
more of a reason why civilisation should be sus- 
pectqdj One may be perfectly justified in being 
always afraid of the blonde beast that lies at the 
core of all aristocratic races, and in being on 
one's guard : but who would not a hundred times 
prefer to be afraid, when one at the same time 
admires, than to be immune from fear, at the cost 
of being perpetually obsessed with the loathsome 
spectacle of the distorted, the dwarfed, the stunted, 
the envenomed ? And is that not our fate ? What 
produces to-day our repulsion towards " man " ? 
— for we suffer from " man," there is no doubt 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 43 

about it. It IS not fear ; it is rather that we have 
nothing more to fear from men ; it is that the 
worm " man " is in the foreground and pullulates ; 
it is thatjj^e " tame man,'' the wretched jnedipcre 
and unedifying creature, has learnt to consider 
himself a goal and a pinnacle, an inner meaning, 
an hfsTonc principle, a ""'higher man '1; yes, it 
is" that he has a certain right so to consider 
himself, in so far as he feels that in contrast to 
that excess of deformity, disease, exhaustion, and 
effeteness whose odour is beginning to pollute 
present-day Europe, he at any rate has achieved 
a relative success, he at any rate still says " yes " 
to life. 

12. 

I cannot refrain at this juncture from uttering 
a sigh and one last hope. What is it precisely 
which I find intolerable? That which I alone 
cannot get rid of, which makes me choke and 
faint ? Bad air ! bad air ! That something 
misbegotten comes near me; that I must inhale 
the odour of the entrails of a misbegotten soul ! — 
That excepted, what can one not endure in the 
way of need, privation, bad weather, sickness, 
toil, solitude? In point of fact, one manages to 
get over everything, born as one is to a burrowing 
and battling existence ; one always returns once 
again to the light, one always lives again one's 
golden hour of victory — and then one stands as 
one was born, unbreakable, tense, ready for some- 
thing more difficult, for something more distant, 
like a bow stretched but the tauter by every strain. 



44 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

But from time to time do ye grant me — assuming 
that " beyond good and evil " there are goddesses 
who can grant — one glimpse, grant me but one 
glimpse only, of something perfect, fully realised, 
happy, mighty, triumphant, of something that 
still gives cause for fear ! A glimpse of a man 
that justifies the existence of ftian^_a_glimgse_ ot" 
"an lncarnateniirfnarr~hg|^fie"sTTEa t realisS^n d 
redeems, -for the sake of^'hich one may holdTfast 
to the belief in man ! JForJJifi-jiosiJ'io'n is thja^ 
in the dwarfing and levelling of the Eur opean 
man lurks our greatest perilj for it is this outlook 
which fatigues — we see to-day nothing which 
wishes to be greater, we^surmi^_that_Jhf prnrpss 
is always still backwards^ still backwar^^aJtQSMtfds- 
something more attenuated, more inoffensivg,JHflre 
cunning, more comfortable, more med iocre, more 
indifferent, more Chinese, more Christian — man, 
there is no doubt about it, grows always " better " 
— the destiny of Europe lies even in thisj j^that 
in losing the fear of nian, wejiave also lost_the_ 
hope in man, yea, the wiU_to.be manJ~TE^light 
of man now fatigues^ — What is presenF-day " 
Nihilism if it is not that ? — We are tired of^«.~ 



13. 

But let us come back to it ; the problem of 
another origin of the good — of the good, as the 
resentful man has thought it out — demands its solu- 
tion. It is not surprising that the lambs should bear 
a grudge against the great birds of prey, but that 
\is no reason for blaming the great birds of prey 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 45 

sfor taking the little lambs. And when the l^bs^ 
I say among themselves, " These birds of prey are 
evil, and he who is as far removed from being a 
bird of prey, who is rather its opposite, a lamb, — 
is he not good ? " then there is nothing to cavil at 
in the setting up of this ideal, though it may also 
be that the birds of prey will regard it a little 
sneeringly, and perchance say to themselves, " We 
bear no grudge against them, these good lambs, 
we even like them : nothing is tastier than a 
tender lamb." (To require of strength that it 
should not express itself as strength, that it should 
not be a wish to overpower, a wish to overthrow, 
a wish to become master, a thirst for enemies 
and antagonisms and triumphs, is just as absurd 
as to require of weakness that it should express 
itself as stren gth, fi A quantum o f force is j ust 
such a quantum of m oy^nentjj all. action — rath er 
i t is nothing else than just those very^^enomena^ 
of movin g, willing, acting, and can only appear 
otherwisejn themisleadingerrors' ot language' 
(and the fundamental fallacies of reason which 
have become petrified therein), w hich unders tands, 
and understands wrongly, all working as con - 
ditioned~by a worker, E y''a~^subie ct." And just 
exactly as the people separate the lightning from 
its flash, and interpret the latter as a thing done, 
as the working of a subject which is called light- 
ning, s o also d oes the popular morality separate 
strength from tKe" expressiuii — uf htreiig l h^ ay 
though behind the stron g man there existed_some 
indifferent neutral substratum, which enjoyed a 
caprice and option as to whether™or~not it shbul3 



46 \ THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

express_sti;ength. But there is no such sui- 
' stratum, there is no " being " behmd^ doing, 
working, becoming; "the doer" is a nTerkJi^i^ 
agVio the action. The action is everything. In 
point of fact, the people dupUcate the doing, 
when they make the lightning lighten, that is a 
" doing-doing " : they make the same phenomenon 
first a cause, and then, secondly, the effect of that 
cause. The scientists fail to improve matters 
when they say, " Force moves, force causes," and 
so on. Our whole science is stillj_in^s pite of all its 
coldness, of all its freedom from passi on, a dup e 
of the tricks of language, and has never succeeded" 
in getting rid of that superstitious_chang.e ling "th e 
subj,ec4;4U(the atom, to give another instance, is 
such a changeling, just as the Kantian " Thing-in- 
itself"). W hat wonder, if the suppressed and 
stealthily simmering passions of revenge~^d 
hatrpd pvplniF tor ffiejrnwn advantage this tjpjjgf, 
and indeed hold.„no belief with a more steadfast 
enthusiasm than this — "that the strong has~the 
option of being weak, and the bir d of prey of B eing 
a lamb." THereby do they win for themselveiTftEr* 
riglit of attributing to the birds of prey the re- 
sponsibility for being birds of prey : when the 
oppressed, down-trodden, and overpowered say to 
themselves with the vindictive guile of weakness, 
" Let us be otherwise than the evil, namely, good ! 
and good is every one who does not oppress, who 
hurts no one, who does not attack, who does not 
pay back, who hands over revenge to God, who 
holds himself, as we do, in hiding ; who goes out 
of the way of evil, and denia nds, in short, litt le.' 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 47 

from life ; like ourselves the patient, the meek, the 
just," — yet all this, in its cold and unprejudiced 
interpretation, means nothing more than " once for 
all, the weak are weak ; it is good to do nothing 
for which we are not strong enough " ; but this dismal 
state of affairs, this prudence of the lowest order, 
which even insects possess (which in a great danger 
are fain to sham death so as to avoid doing " too 
much "), has, thanks to the counterfeiting and 
self-deception of weakness, come to masquerade in 
the pomp of an ascetic, mute, and expectant virtue, 
JTjust as though the verj/ weakness of the weak — 
that is, forsooth, its being, its working, its whole 
unique inevitable inseparable reality — were a 
voluntary result, something wished, chosen, a deed, 
an act of me rit. | This kind^of man finds-the belief 
in a neutral, free-choosing " subject" necessary 
from— affTTisttnfft of seli-preservation, of self-asser- 
tion, in "Which'everyTie is fain to sanctify^ itself. 
■Jhe^subject (or, to use jpopular language, the jg^Q.. 
has perEaps~proved itself the best dogm.a.in the 
world simply because it rendered .possible-to.the 
horde of mortal, weak, and oppressed individuals 
of every kind, that most sublime specimelT o f seTT- 
deception, !He~ interpretation of weakness as 
freedom7"o^f~&eing'TKis,~6r being that, as merit. 



14. 

Will any one look a little into — right into — the 
mystery of how ideals are manufactured in this 
world ? Who has the courage to do it ? Come ! 

Here we have a vista opened into these grimy 



48 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

workshops. Wait just a moment, dear Mr. In- 
quisitive and Foolhardy ; your eye must first grow 
accustomed to this false changing light — Yes! 
Enough ! Now speak ! What is happening 
below down yonder? Speak out that what yoi 
see, man of the most dangerous curiosity — for 
now I am the listener. 

" I see nothing, I hear the more. It is a 
cautious, spiteful, gentle whispering and muttering 
together in all the corners and crannies. It seems 
to me that they are lying; a sugary softness 
adheres to every sound. Weakness is turned to 
merit, there is no doubt about it — it is just as 
you say." 

Further ! 

" And the impotence which requites not, is 
turned to " goodness,' craven baseness to meek- 
ness, submission to those whom one hates, to 
obedience (namely, obedience to one of whom 
they say that he ordered this submission — they 
call him God). The inoffensive character of the 
weak, the very cowardice in which he is rich, his 
standing at the door, his forced necessity of wait- 
ing, gain here fine names, such as ' patience,' 
which is also called ' virtue ' ; not being able to 
avenge one's self, is called not wishing to avenge 
one's self, perhaps even forgiveness (for they know 
not what they do — we alone know what they do). 
They also talk of the ' love of their enemies ' and 
sweat thereby." 

Further ! 
/ " They are miserable, there is no doubt about 
it, all these whisperers and counterfeiters in the 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 49 

corners, although they try to get warm by 
crouching close to each other, but they tell me 
that their misery is a favour and distinction given 
to them by God, just as one beats the dogs one 
likes best; that perhaps this misery is also a 
preparation, a probation, a training ; that perhaps 
it is still more something which will one day be 
compensated and paid back with a tremendous 
interest in gold, nay in happiness. This they call 
' Blessedness.'"! 

Further ! 

" They are now giving me to understand, that 
not only are they better men than the mighty, 
the lords of the earth, whose spittle they have 
got to lick {not out of fear, not at all out of fear ! 
But because God ordains that one should honour 
all authority) — not only are they better men, but 
that they also have a 'better time,' at any rate, 
will one day have a ' better time.' But enough ! 
Enough ! I can endure it no longer. Bad air ! 
Bad air ! These workshops where ideals are manu- 
factured — ^verily they reek with the crassest lies." 

Nay. Just one minute ! You are saying 
nothing about the masterpieces of these"~virtuosos 
of^lack magic, whu can piuducti whiteness jlTuTk, 
"and innocence out of any black you like : have 
you not noticed what a pitch of refinement is 
attained by their chef d'aeuvre, their most audacious, 
subtle, ingenious, and lying artist-trick ? Take 
care ! These cellar-beasts, full of revenge and 

hate — what 3o ' they "^aESr forsooth, out of their 

revenge and hate?__Do, you hejx_these._words? 
~~Wou0 yoiT suspect, if you trusted only their 
D 



so THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS, 

words, that you are among men of resentment 
and nothing else ? 

" I understand, I prick my ears up again (ah ! 
ah ! ah ! and I hold my nose). Now do I hear 
for the first time that which they have said so 
often : ' We good, we are the righteous ' — what 
tfcey demand they call not revenge but 'the 
triumph of righteousness ' ; what they hate is not 
their enemy, no, they hate ' unrighteousness,' 
f godlessness ' ; what they believe in and hope is 
mot the hope of revenge, the intoxication of sweet 
I revenge ( — " sweeter than honey," did Homer 
call it ?), but the victory of God, of the righteous 
God over the ' godless ' ; what is left for them to 
love in this world is not their brothers in hate, 
but their ' brothers in love,' as they say, all the 
good and righteous on the earth." 

And how do they name that which serves them as 
a solace against all the troubles of life — their phan- 
tasmagoria of their anticipated future blessedness ? 

" How ? Do I hear right ? They call it ' the 
last judgment,' the advent of their kingdom, ' the 
kingdom of God ' — but in the meanwhile they live 
' in faith,' ' in love,' ' in hope.' " 

Enough ! Enough ! 

15. 

In the faith in what? In the love for what? 
In the hope of what ? These weaklings ! — they 
also, forsooth, wish to be the strong some time; 
there is no doubt about it, some time their 
kingdom also must come — " the kingdom of God" 
is their name for it, as has been mentioned: — 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 51 

they are so meek in everything ! Yet in order 
to experience that kingdom it is necessary to liv( 
long, to live beyond death, — yes, eternal life i; 
necessary so that one can make up for ever foi 
that earthly life " in faith," " in love," " in hope.' 
Make up for what ? Make up by what ? Dante, 
as it seems to me, made a crass mistake when with 
awe-inspiring ingenuity he placed that inscription 
over the gate of his hell, " Me too made eternal 
love " : at any rate the following inscription would 
have a much better right to stand over the gate 
of the Christian Paradise and its " eternal blessed- 
ness " — " Me too made eternal hate "—granted of 
course that a truth may rightly stand over the 
gate to a" lie! For what is the blessedness of 
that Paradise ? Possibly we could quickly surmise 
it; but it is better that it should be explicitly 
attested by an authority who in such matters is 
not to be disparaged, Thomas of Aquinas, the 
great teacher and saint. " Beati in regno celesti" 
says he, as gently as a lamb, " videbunt pcenas 
damnatorum, ut beatitude illis magis complaceat." 
Or if we wish to hear a stronger tone, a word 
from the mouth of a triumphant father of the 
Church, who warned his disciples against the 
cruel ecstasies of the public spectacles — But why ? 
Faith offers us much more, — says he, de Spectac, 
c. 29 ss., — something much stronger ; thanks to 
the redemption, joys of quite another kind stand 
at our disposal ; instead of athletes we have our 
martyrs; we wish for blood, well, we have the 
blood of Christ — but what then awaits us on the 
day of his return, of his triumph. And then does he 



52 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

proceed, does this enraptured visionary : " at enim 
supersunt alia spectacula, ille ultimus et perpetuus 
judicii dies, ille nationibus insperatus, ille derisus, 
cum tanta scecuH vetustas et tot ejus nativitates uno 
igne haurientur. Quce tunc spectaculi latitude ! 
Quid admirer! quid rideam ! Ubi gaudeam! 
Ubi exultem., spectans tot et tantos reges, qui in 
ccelum recepti nuntiabantur, cum ipso Jove et ipsis 
suis testibus in imis tenebris congemescentes ! Item 
prcBsides " (the provincial governors) " persecutores 
dominici nominis scevioribus quam ipsi flammis 
scBvierunt insultantibus contra Christianas liques- 
centes ! Quos prceterea sapientes illos pkilosophos 
coram discipulis suis una conflagrantibus erubes-, 
centes, quibus nihil ad deum, pertinere suadebant, 
quibus animas aut nullas aut non in pristina corpora 
redituras affirmabant ! Etiam poetas non ad Rhad- 
amanti nee ad Minois, sed ad inopinati Christi 
tribunal palpitantes I Tunc m^agis tragcedi audiendi, 
magis scilicet vocales " (with louder tones and more 
violent shrieks) " in sua propria calamitate; tunchis- 
triones cognoscendi, solutiores tnulto per ignem ; tunc 
spectandus auriga in flammea rota totus rubens, 
tunc xystici contemplandi non in gym.nasiis, sed in 
igne jaculati, nisi quod ne tunc quidem illos velim 
vivos, ut qui malim ad eos potius conspectum in- 
satiabilem conferre, qui in dominum scBvierunt, 
Hie est ille, dicam fabri aut qucBstuarice filius " 
(as is shown by the whole of the following, and 
in particular by this well-known description of 
the mother of Jesus from the Talmud, Tertullian 
is henceforth referring to the Jews), " sabbati 
destructor, Samarites et dcemonium habens. Hie 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." S3 

est quem a Juda redemistis, htc est ille arundine 
et colaphis diverberatus, sputamentis de decoratus, 
felle et aceto potatus. Hie est, quem clam discentes 
subripuerunt, ut resurrexisse dicatur vel hortulanus 
detraxit, ne lactucce suce frequentia commeantium. 
Icederentur. Ut talia spectes, ut talibus exultes, 
quis tibi praetor aut consul aut sacerdos de sua 
liberalitate prcestabit f Et tamen hcec jam, habemus 
quodammodo per fidem spiritu imaginante re- 
prcesentata. Ceterum. qualia ilia sunt, quce nee 
oculus vidit nee auris audivit nee in cor hominis 
ascenderunt ? " (i Cor. ii. 9.) "Credo circo et 
utraque cavea " (first and fourth row, or, according 
to others, the comic and the tragic stage) " et omni 
studio gratiora" Per fidem: so stands it written. 



16. 

Let us come to a conclusion. The two opposing 
values, " good and bad," " good and evil," have 
fought a dreadful, thousand-year fight in the 
world, and though indubitably the second value 
has been for a long time in the preponderance, 
there are not wanting places where the fortune 
of the fight is still undecisive. It can almost 
be said that in the meariiw^e_the_fight_reaches 
"Triltgher and higherTevel, and that in the meaii^ 
while it has become more and more intense, anE~ 
always more and more psychological ; so that 
TTow^'ays there is perhaps no more decisive m ark 
of the higher nature, of the more psychological 
nature, than to Be in that ^ense self-contra-5 
dictory, and toSe actually still a battleground' 



54 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

for those two opposites. The symbol of this 
fight, written in a writing which has remained 
worthy of perusal throughout the course of history 
up to the present time, is called " Rome against 
Judaea, Judaea against Rome." H itherto there 
^as been no greater e vent than that hgtit, t he~ 
I'puttmg ol T^^K 5^^^^RiJE91J ^^^^^^ a n.ta ^ni.si^ 
Rome found in the Jew the incarnation of the 
unnatural, as though it were its diametrically 
opposed monstrosity, and in Rome the Jew was 
held to be convicted of hatred of the whole human 
race: and rightly so, in so far as it is right 
to link the well-being and the future of the 
human race to the unconditional mastery of the 
aristocratic values, of the Roman values. What, 
conversely, did the Jews feel against Rome ? One 
can surmise it from a thousand symptoms, but 
it is sufficient to carry one's mind back to the 
Johannian Apocalypse, that most obscene of all 
the written outbursts, which has revenge on its 
conscience. (One should also appraise at its full 
value the profound logic of the Christian instinct, 
when over this very book of hate it wrote the name 
of the Disciple of Love, that self-same disciple 
to whom it attributed that impassioned and 
ecstatic Gospel — therein lurks a portion of truth, 
however much literary forging may have been 
necessary for this purpose.) The Romans were 
the strong and aristocratic ; a nation stronger and 
more aristocratic has never existed in the world, 
has never even been dreamed of; every relic of 
them, every inscription enraptures, granted that 
one can divine what it is that writes the inscrip- 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." 55 

tion. The Jews, conversely, were that priestly- 
nation of resentment /«>• excellence, possessed by 
a unique genius for popular morals : just compare 
with the Jews the nations with analogous gifts, 
such as the Chinese or the Germans, so as to 
realise afterwards what is first rate, and what is 
fifth rate. 

Which of them has been provisionally victorious, 
Rome or Judaea? but there is not a shadow of 
doubt ; just consider to whom in Rome itself 
nowadays you bow down, as though before the 
quintessence of all the highest values — and not 
only in Rome, but almost over half the world, 
everywhere where man has been tamed or is 
about to be tamed — to three Jews, as we know, 
and one Jewess (to Jesus of Nazareth, to Peter 
the fisher, to Paul the tent-maker, and to the 
mother of the aforesaid Jesus, named Mary). 
This is very remarkable : Rome is undoubtedly 
defeated. At any rate there took place in the 
Renaissance a brilliantly sinister revival of the 
classical ideal, of the aristocratic valuation of all 
things: Rome herself, like a man waking up from 
a trance, stirred beneath the burden of the new 
Judaised Rome that had been built over her, 
which presented the appearance of an oecumenical 
synagogue and was called the " Church " : but 
immediately Judsea triumphed again, thanks to 
that fundamentally popular (German and English) 
movement of revenge, which is called the Reform- 
ation, and taking also into account its inevitable 
corollary, the restoration of the Church — the 
restoration also of the ancient graveyard peace 



$6 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

of classical Rome. Judaea proved yet once more 
victorious over the classical ideal in the French 
Revolution, and in a sense which was even more 
crucial and even more profound : the last 
political aristocracy that existed in Europe, that 
of the French seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 
broke into pieces beneath the instincts of a 
resentful populace — never had the world heard 
a greater jubilation, a more uproarious enthusiasm : 
indeed, there took place in the midst of it the 
most monstrous and unexpected phenomenon ; 
the ancient ideal itself swept before the eyes and 
conscience of humanity with all its life and with 
unheard-of splendour, and in opposition to resent- 
ment's lying war-cry of the prerogative of the most, 
in opposition to the will to lowliness, abasement, 
and equalisation, the will to a retrogression and 
twilight of humanity, there rang out once again, 
stronger, simpler, more penetrating than ever, 
the terrible and enchanting counter-warcry of 
the prerogative of the few ! Like a final sign- 
post to other ways, there appeared Napoleon, the 
most unique and violent anachronism that ever 
existed, and in him the incarnate problem of the 
aristocratic ideal in itself — consider well what a 
problem it is : — Napoleon, that synthesis of 
Monster and Superman. 



17- 

Was it therewith over ? Was that greatest of all 
antitheses of ideals thereby relegated ad acta for 
all time ? Or only postponed, postponed for a long 



"GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD." S7 

time? May there not take place at some time 
or other a much more awful, much more carefully 
prepared flaring up of the old conflagration? 
Further ! Should not one wish tkat consumma- 
tion with all one's strength? — will it one's self? 
demand it one's self? He who at this juncture 
begins, like my readers, to reflect, to think further, 
will have difficulty in cOming quickly to a con- 
clusion, — ground enough for me to come myself 
to a conclusion, taking it for granted that for some 
time past what I mean has been sufficiently clear, 
what I exactly mean by that dangerous motto 
which is inscribed on the body of my last book : 
( Beyond Good and Evil — at any rate that is not the 
same as " Beyond Good and Bad." I 

Note. — I avail myself of the opportunity offered by this 
treatise to express, openly and formally, a wish which up 
to the present has only been expressed in occasional con- 
versations with scholars, namely, that some Faculty of 
philosophy should, by means of a series of prize essays, 
gain the glory of having promoted the further study of the 
history of morals— ■pMhs.ps this book may serve to give a for- 
cible impetus in such a direction. With regard to a possibility 
of this character, the following question deserves considera- 
tion. It merits quite as much the attention of philologists 
and historians as of actual professional philosophers. 

" What indication of the history of the evolution of the 
moral ideas is afforded by philology, and especially by etymo- 
logical investigation f " 

On the other hand, it is of course equally necessary to 
induce physiologists and doctors to be interested in these 
problems {of the value of the valuations which have prevailed 
up to the present) : in this connection the professional philo- 
sophers may be trusted to act as the spokesmen and inter- 
mediaries in these particular instances, after, of course, they 
have quite succeeded in transforming the relationship between 



58 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

philosophy and physiology and medicine, which is originally 
one of coldness and suspicion, into the most friendly and fruit- 
ful reciprocity. In point of fact, all tables of values, all the 
" thou shalts " known to history and ethnology, need primarily 
a physiological, at any rate in preference to a psychological, 
elucidation and interpretation ; all equally require a critique 
from medical science. The question, "What is the value 
of this or that table of ' values ' and morality ? " will be 
asked from the most varied standpoints. For instance, the 
question of " valuable/()r what " can never be analysed with 
sufficient nicety. That, for instance, which would evidently 
have value with regard to promoting in a race the greatest 
possible powers of endurance (or with regard to increasing 
its adaptability to a specific climate, or with regard to the 
preservation of the grefatest number) would have nothing 
like the same value/ if it were a question of evolving a 
stronger species. In gauging values, the good of the 
majority and the good of the minority are opposed stand- 
points : we leave it to the naivety of English biologists to 
regard the former standpoint as intrinsically superior. All 
the sciences have now to pave the way for the future task 
of the philosopher ; this task being understood to mean, that 
he must solve the problem of value, that he has to fix the 
hierarchy of values. 



SECOND ESSAY. 

"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND 
THE LIKE. 



The breeding of an animal that ca« promis&rr^r 
is not this just that very paradox of a task which 
nature has set it self liT^regard foTnan ? Is^oT 
tKisThe very problem of man^r^'The fact that this 
problem has been to a great extent solved, must 
appear all the more phenomenal to one who can 
estimate at its full value that force oi forgetfulness 
which works in oppositioiTT orE Forgetfulness 
IS no mere vis inerticB, as the superficial believe, 
rather is it a power of nhstniction. a rtivp anH in 
the strictest sense of the word , positive-; ^— ?, p^^^f . 
res nonsible for the fact that what we have lived . 
experienced, taken into ourselves, no more enter s 
into xoasKigusaess. during the process of digest ion 
(it might be called psychic absorption) than all the 
whole manifold process by which our physical 
nutrition, the so-called " incorporation," is carried 
on. Th e temporary shutting of the doors and 
windows ~ of cpn ad-QUSneas. the relief from the 
clamant alarums and excursions, with which our 
subconscious world of servant organs works in 
mutual co-operation and antagonism ; a little 
quietude,_ a little tabula rasa of the co nsciousness^ 
so a s to make room aga in for the new, an? ^Bovg 
a jOar the moreT Totrlerfg^fions and lunctionariesj 
tor ' ' 



62 ; THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

is the utility, as I have said, of the a ctive forge tful- 
rieSST-which is a very sentinel and nurse of psychic 
oFaBTTT^ose, etiquette; and this shows at once 
why it is that tfriere ^ can _exist_ no_ha2£iiness, no 
gladnessj no hope^no pridfiA_n o real present, withou F 
forgetfulness. The man in whom this preventati ve 
■apparatus is damaged and discarded, is to be com- 
pared~to~ar-d7Spgptte7a'nd" it" Is""s'omething more 
than a comparison — he can " get rid of" nothing. 
But this very animal who finds it necess ary to be 
forgetful, in whom, in fact, forgetfulness represents 
a force and a form of robust health, has reared for~ 
himself an opposition-power, a mem ory, witH 
whose help forgetfulness is, in cer tain mstan ces, 
kept in check — in the cases, namely, wh ere prom iseg- 
have to be made; — so that it is by no means a 
mere passive inability to get rid of a once indented 
impression, not merely the indigestion occasioned 
by a once pledged word, which one cannot dispose 
of, but an active refusal to get rid of it, a con- 
tin miTg~ana"'a wish to continue what has on ce bee n 
willed, an actual rnemory ofihewM}, so that 
between the original ."-I- will," " I shalL-dQ,'LaQi_ 
the actual discharge of the will, its ^ao;. we joap 
e asily i nterpose a world_of ne_w strange^phenomena, 
circumstances, veritable volitions, without the 
snapping of this long chain of the will. But what 
is the underlying hypothesis of all this? How 
thoroughly, in order to b e able to regulate the 
future in this way, must man have first learnt to 
dis tinguish between necessitated and accidental 
^phenomena, to thi nk causally, to see the distant 
as~prg5eiit and to anticipate it, to fix with certainty 



"GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 63 

what is the end, and what is the means to that 
end ; abovS all, lu ifccfeonTlEo^have power to calculate 
— ^^Eow thoroughly must matTIGave first become 
calculable, disciplined, necessitated even for himself 
and his own conception of himself, that, like a man 
entering into a promise, he could guarantee himself 
as a future. 

2. 

This is simply the long history of the origin of 
respormbttttyT Thai Lask uf breeding^ an animal 
whiclf^a n n?ake p romises, includes, as we have 
already grasped, as its condition and preliminary, 
the more immediate task of first making man to a 
certain extent, necessitated, uniform, like among 
his like, regular, and consequently calculable. The 
immense work of what I have called, " morality of 
custom " * (cp. Dawn of Day, Aphs. 9, 14, and 1 6), 
the actual work of man on himself during the 
longest period of the human race, his whole pre- 
historic work, finds its meaning, its great justifica- 
tion (in spite of all its innate hardness, despotism, 
stupidity, and idiocy) in this fact : man, with the 
help of the morality of customs and of social strait- 
waistcoats, was made genuinely calculable. If, how- 
ever, we place ourselves at the end of this colossal 
process, at the point where the tree finally matures 
its fruits, when society and its morality of custom 
finally bring to light that to which it was only 
the means, then do we find as the ripest fruit on its 
tree the sovereign individual, that reseliiBles"only 
himself, that h as' got' roose~ffonr'the morality of 

* The German is : " Sittlichkeit der Sitte." H. B. S. 



64 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

custom, the autonomous " super-moral " indnddual 
(for "autohombus" and "moral" are mutually 
exclusive terms), — in short, the man of the personal, 
long, and independent will, competent to promuep^ 
and we find in him a proud consciousness (vibrat- 
ing in every fibre), of what has been at last 
achieved and become vivified in him, a genuine 
consciousness of power and freedom, a feeling of 
human perfection in general. And this man who 
h as grown to freedpm; _^br> jp rpally mmp^fK^f^f »» 
promise, thi s lord of the/i^-ge will, this sovereign — 
^ low is rtpossibre f or^^trfj nbt to Unow how great 
is his su^ eriority^,Qygr_,,eve]ything^tirapahlq_nfJ 
binding itself by promises, or of being its own 
security, how great is the trust, the awe, the 
reverence that he awakes — he " deserves " all three 
— not to know that with this mastery over himself 
he is necessarily also given the mastery over 
circumstances, over nature, over all creatures with 
shorter wills, less reliable characters ? rTbeJifree " 
man, the o^<rner of a long unbreakable wiU,^dsin_ 
this possession his^.ri[«»i&r(/ of value: looking out 
from himself upon the others, he honours or he 
despises, and just as necessarily as he honours his 
peers, the strong and the reliable (those who can 
bind themselves by promises), — that is, every one 
who promises like a sovereign, with difficulty, rarely 
and slowly, who is sparing with his trusts but 
confers honour by the very fact of trusting, who 
gives his word as something that can berelied on, 
because he knows himself strong enough to keep it 
even in the teeth of disasters, eveiT in'gie '^"SetlT 
of fate," — so with equal necessity will he have the 



"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKf. 65 

heel of his foot ready for the lean and empty jack- 
as^, who promise when they have no business to 
do so^and his rod of chastisement ready for the liar, 
who already breaks his word at the very minute when 
it is on his lips. The proud knowledge oflhejaxtradi 
ordinary pri vilege o f respon sibility, the consci QUSr' 
ness of thisjare freedom, of this power ovpr bim-gplf 
aiiH^ OTcr fate, Jbas.sunk_right dgwnjta his innermost^ 
depths, and has become an instinct, a_dominating 
instinctrr^what name will he give to it, to this 
dominating instinct, iTTie" needfTcT Mve "a worH^ "for" 
it ? But there is no doubt about it — the sovereign . 
man calls it his conscience. J 



His conscience? — One apprehends at once that 
the idea " conscience," which is here seen in its 
supreme manifestation, supreme in fact to almost 
the point of strangeness, should already have 
behind it a long history and evolution. The ability 
t o guarantee one's self with all due pride, and also 
a t the same time to say ves to one's self— -that is, as 
hasjbeen said^aripefruit, bi|t also a laie_hm.t : — 
How long must needs this fruit hang sour and 
bitter on the tree ! And for an even longer 
period there was not a glimpse of such a fruit to 
to be had — no one had taken it on himself to 
promise it, although everything on the tree was 
quite ready for it, and everything was maturing 
for that very consummation. " How is a memory 
to be made for the man-animal ? How is an im- 
pression to be so deeply fixed upon this ephemeral 
E 



66 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

understanding, half dense, and half silly, upon this 
incarnate forgetfulness, that it will be perman- 
ently present ?" As one may imagine, this primeval 
problem was not solved by exactly gentle answers 
and gentle means ; perhaps there is nothing more 
awful and more sinister in the early history of man 
than his system of mnemonics. " Something is burnt 
in so as to remain in his memory : only that which 
never stops hurting remains in his memory.'' 
This is an axiom of the oldest (unfortunately 
also the longest) psychology in the world. It 
might even be said that wherever solemnity7~~ 
seriousness, mystery, and gloomy colour's" are ttow->^ 
found in the life of the men and of nations of the 
world, there is some survival of that horror which 
was once the universal concomitant of all promises, 
pledges, and obligations. The past, th&^JfliLr^^ 
with all its length, depth, and hardness, wafts 
to us its breath, and bubbles up in us again, when 
we become " serious." ' When man thinks it neces- 
sary to make for himself a memory, he never 
accomplishes it without blood, tortures, and 
sacrifice ; the most dreadful sacrifices and for- 
feitures (among them the sacrifice of the first-bom), 
the most loathsome mutilation (for instance, 
castration), the most cruel rituals of all the religious 
cults (for all religions are really at bottom systems 
of cruelty)- — all these things originate from that 
instinct which found in pain its most polenT"" 
mnemon ics In a certain sense the whole of asceti- 
cism is to be ascribed to this : certain ideas have got 
to be made inextinguishable, omnipresent, " fixed," 
with the object of hypnotising the whole nervous 



"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. ^J 

and intellectual system through these " fixed 
ideas " — and the ascetic methods and modes of 
life are the means of freeing those ideas from the 
competition of all other ideas so as to make them 
"unforgettable." The worse memory man had, 
the ghastlier the signs presented by his customs ; 
the severity of the penal laws affords in particular 
a gauge of the extent of man's difficulty in 
conquering forgetfulness, and in keeping a few 
primal postulates of social intercourse ever present 
to the minds of those who were the slaves of 
every momentary emotion and every momentary 
desire. We Germans do certainly not regard 
ourselves as an especially cruel and hard-hearted 
nation, still less as an especially casual and happy- 
go-lucky one ; but one has only to look at our 
old penal ordinances in order to realise what a 
lot of trouble it takes in the world to evolve a 
" nation of thinkers " (I mean : the European nation 
which exhibits at this very day the maximum of 
reliability, seriousness, bad taste, and positiveness, 
which has on the strength of these qualities a 
right to train every kind of European mandarin). 
These Germans employed terrible means to make 
for themselves a memory, to enable them to 
master their rooted plebeian instincts and the 
brutal crudity of those instincts : think of the old 
German punishments, for instance, stoning (as far 
back as the legend, the millstone falls on the head 
of the guilty man), breaking on the wheel (the 
most original invention and speciality of the 
German genius in the sphere of punishment), dart- 
throwing, tearing, or trampling by horses (" quarter- 



68 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

ing"), boiling the criminal in oil or wine (still 
prevalent in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries), 
the highly popular flaying (" slicing into strips "), 
cutting the flesh out of the breast ; think also of 
the evil-doer being besmeared with honey, and 
then exposed to the flies in a blazing sun. It 
was by the help of such images and precedents 
that man eventually kept in his memory five or 
six " I will nots " with regard to which he had 
already given his promise, so as to be able to 
enjoy the advantages of society — and verily with 
the help of this kind of memory man eventually 
attained " reason " ! Alas ! reason, seriousness, 
mastery over the emotions, all these gloomy, 
dismal things which are called reflection, all these 
privileges and pageantries of humanity : how dear 
is the price that they have exacted ! How much 
blood and cruelty is the foundation of all " good 
things " ! 

4- 

But how is it that that other melancholy object, 
the consciousness of sin, the whole "bad conscience," 
came into the world ? And it is here that we turn 
back to our genealogists of morals. For the second 
time I say — or have I not said it yet ? — that they 
are worth nothing. Just their own five-spans-long 
limited modern experience ; no knowledge of the 
past, and no wish to know it ; still less a historic 
instinct, a power of " second sight " (which is what 
is really required in this case) — and despite this to 
go in for the history of morals. It stands to 
reason that this must needs produce results which 



"GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 69 

are removed from the truth by something more 
than a respectful distance. 

Have these current genealogists of morals 
ever allowed themselves to have even the 
vaguest notion, for instance, that the cardinal 
moral idea of " ought " * originates from the very 
material idea of " owe " ? Or that punishment 
developed as a retaliation absolutely independ- 
ently of any preliminary hypothesis of the free- 
dom or determination of the will ? — And this to 
such an extent, that a high degree of civilisation 
was always first necessary for the animal man to 
begin to make those much more primitive dis- 
tinctions of" intentional," " negligent," " accidental," 
" responsible," and their contraries, and apply them 
in the assessing of punishment. That idea — " the 
wrong-doer deserves punishment because he might 
have acted otherwise," in spite of the fact that it 
is nowadays so cheap, obvious, natural, and in- 
evitable, and that it has had to serve as an 
illustration of the way in which the sentiment of 
justice appeared on earth, is in point of fact an 
exceedingly late, and even refined form of human 
judgment and inference ; the placing of this idea 
back at the beginning of the world is simply a 
clumsy violation of the principles of primitive t 
psychology. Throughout the longest period of 
human history punishment was never based on 
the responsibility of the evil-doer for his action, 
and was consequently not based on the hypothesis 



* The German world " schuld " means both debt and 
guilt. Cp. the English "owe" and "ought," by which I 
occasionally render the double meaning. — H. B. S. 



70 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

that only the guilty should be punished ; — on the 
contrary, punishment was inflicted in those days 
for the same reason that parents punish their 
children even nowadays, out of anger at an injury 
that they have suffered, an anger which vents 
itself mechanically on the author of the injury — 
but this anger is kept in bounds and modified 
through the idea that every injury has somewhere 
or other its equivalent price, and can really be 
paid off, even though it be by means of pain to 
the author. Whence is it that this ancient deep- 
rooted and now perhaps ineradicable idea has 
drawn its strength, this idea of an equivalency 
between injury and pain ? I have already re- 
vealed its origin, in the contractual relationship 
between creditor and ower, that is as old as the 
existence of legal rights at all, and in its turn points 
back to the primary forms of purchase, sale, barter, 
and trade. 

5- 

The realisation of these contractual relations 
excites, of course (as would be already expected 
from our previous observations), a great deal of 
suspicion and opposition towards the primitive 
society which made or sanctioned them. In this 
society promises will be made ; in this society the 
object is to provide the promiser with a memory; 
in this society, so may we suspect, there will 
be full scope for hardness, cruelty, and pain: the 
" ower," in order to induce credit in his promise 
of repayment, in order to give a guarantee of the 
earnestness and sanctity of his promise, in order 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. J I 

to drill into his own conscience the duty, the 
solemn duty, of repayment, will, by virtue of a 
contract with his creditor to meet the contingency 
of his not paying, pledge something that he still 
possesses, something that he still has in his power, 
for instance, his life or his wife, or his freedom 
or his body (or under certain religious con- 
ditions even his salvation, his soul's welfare, even 
his peace in the grave ; so in Egypt, where the 
corpse of the ower found even in the grave no rest 
from the creditor — of course, from the Egyptian 
standpoint, this peace was a matter of particular 
importance). But especially has the creditor the 
power of inflicting on the body of the ower all 
kinds of pain and torture — the power, for instance, 
of cutting off from it an amount that appeared 
proportionate to the greatness of the debt ; — this 
point of view resulted in the universal prevalence 
at an early date of precise schemes of valuation, 
frequently horrible in the minuteness and meti- 
culosity of their application, legally sanctioned 
schemes of valuation for individual limbs and parts 
of the body. I consider it as already a progress, 
as a proof of a freer, less petty, and more Roman 
conception of law, when the Roman Code of the 
Twelve Tables decreed that it was immaterial how 
much or how little the creditors in such a con- 
tingency cut off, " si plus minusve secuerunt, ne 
fraude esto." Let us make the logic of the whole 
of this equalisation process clear; it is strange 
enough. The equivalence consists in this : in- 
stead of an advantage directly compensatory of his 
injury (that is, instead of an equalisation in money, 



72 / THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

lands, or some kind of chattel), the creditor is 
granted by way of repayment and compensation 
a certain sensation of satisfaction — the satisfaction 
of being able to vent, without any trouble, his 
power on one who is powerless, the delight " de 
/aire le mal pour le plaisir de le faire" the joy 
in sheer violence : and this joy will be relished in 
proportion to the lowness and humbleness of the 
creditor in the social scale, and is quite apt to 
have the effect of the most delicious dainty, and 
even seem the foretaste of a higher social position. 
Thanks to the punishment of the "ower," the 
creditor participates in the rights of the masters. 
At last he too, for once in a way, attains the edifying 
consciousness of being able to despise and ill-treat 
a creature — as an " inferior " — or at any rate of 
seeing him being despised and ill-treated, in case 
the actual power of punishment, the administration 
of punishment, has already become transferred to 
the " authorities." The compensation consequently 
consists in a claim on cruelty and a right to draw 
thereon. 



of the ideas of " guilt, " " conscien ce ," " duty." t he^ 
""sacredness ^ dut y,"— their commenceme nt,-like__ 
tEe~ commen cement of all great things in the 
wgrld^is ^thoroughly -an d cont inu ouoly saturate^ZT 
^svithrrbleed. And should we not add that this 
world has never really lost a certain savour of 
blood and torture (not even in old Kant' the 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 73 

categorical imperative reeks of cruelty). It was 
in this sphere likewise that there first became 
formed that sinister and perhaps now indissoluble 
association of the ideas of " guilt " and " suffering." 
pTo put the question yet again, why can suffering be 
a compensation for " owing " ? — Because the inflic- 
tion of suffering produces the highest degree of 
happiness, because the injured party will get in 
exchange for his loss (including his vexation at 
his loss) an extraordinary counter-pleasure: the 
infliction of suffering — a real feast, something 
that, as I have said, was all the more appreciated 
the greater the paradox created by the rank and 
social status of the creditQjJ These observations 
are purely conjectural ; for, apart from the painful 
nature of the task, it is hard to plumb such pro- 
found depths : the clumsy introduction of the idea 
of " revenge " as a connecting-link simply hides 
and obscures the view instead of rendering it 
clearer (revenge itself simply leads back again to 
the identical problem — " How can the infliction of 
suffering be a satisfaction ? "). In my opinion it 
is repugnant to the delicacy, and still more to 
the hypocrisy of tame domestic animals (that is, 
modern men ; that is, ourselves), to realise with all 
their energy the extent to which cruelty con- 
stituted the great joy and delight of ancient man, 
was an ingredient which seasoned nearly all his 
pleasures, and conversely the extent of the nalvet^ 
and innocence with which he manifested his need for 
cruelty, when he actually made as a matter of prin- 
ciple " disinterested malice " (or, to use Spinoza's 
expression, the sympathia malevolens) into a normal 



p 



74 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

characteristic of man — as consequently something 
to which the conscience says a hearty yes. The 
more profound observer has perhaps already had 
sufficient opportunity for noticing this most 
ancient and radical joy and delight of mankind; 
m Beyond Good and Evil, Aph. i88 (and even 
earlier, in The Dawn of Day, Aphs. i8, TJ, 113), 
I have cautiously indicated the continually grow- 
ing spiritualisation and " deification " of cruelty, 
which pervades the whole history of the higher 
civilisation (and in the larger sense even con- 
stitutes i.^ At any rate the time is not so 
long past when it was impossible to conceive of 
royal weddings and national festivals on a grand 
scale, without executions, tortures, or perhaps an 
auto-da-f^, or similarly to conceive of an aristocratic 
household, without a creature to serve as a butt 
for the cruel and malicious baiting of the inmates. 
(The reader will perhaps remember Don Quixote 
at the court of the Duchess : we read nowadays 
the whole of Don Quixote with a bitter taste in 
the mouth, almost with a sensation of torture, a 
fact which would appear very strange and very 
incomprehensible to the author and his con- 
temporaries — they read it with the best con- 
science in the world as the gayest of books ; they 
almost died with laughing at it.) The sight oil 
suffering does one good, the infliction of sufleririg 
does one i ' n ore--good^^^iMsTS''a "hard maxim, but 
Tione-the less aTTundamehtal maxim, old, powerful, 
ati' d " hu man, all -L uu-h tnn^n'^'7 one, moreover, to 
which perhaps evenThe^pes'as well would sub- 
scribe : for it is said that in in venting bizarre 



"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE; 75 

y 

Cj-iioltiffg tlipy arp gnnng ghnnHant pfoniLjif' 4heir 

future h um anity, to which, a s_it were, they are 

play ing the p relude. VV^ithout cruelty, no feast. : 

so teaches the oldest and longest history of man 
—and i n punishment too is there so much of the 



Entertaining, as I do, these thoughts, I am, let 
me say in parenthesis, fundamentally opposed to 
helping our pessimists to new water for the dis- 
cordant and groaning mills of their disgust with 
life; on the contrary, it should be shown specifi- 
cally that, at the time when mankind was not yet 
ashamed of its cruelty, life in the world was 
brighter than it is nowadays when there are 
pessimists. The darkening of the heavens over 
man has always increased in propoxtloji, ,tp.-- the 
growth of man's shame before j^n. Thg^ tired 
"pessimistic dutloolc, the mistrust of the riddle 
of life, tKg~i(!:y fiegatiiM~of "^^sgusteg~enn'ui, all 
thos^ ^re jiot the signs of the most evil age of 
the human race : much rather do they come 
first to the light of day, as the swamp-flowers, 
which they are, when the swamp to which they 
belong, comes into existence — I mean the diseased 
refinement and moralisation, thanks to which the 
" animal man " has at last learnt to be ashamed 
of all his instincts. On the road to angel-hood^ 
(not to use in this context a harder -wDni)-inan 
has developed that dyspeptic stomach and coated 
tongue. wEicE~have made not j jnjvjthe^jov and 
"ioQC^.C£_eLj.he _animd repulsive to him, but 



J6 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

I also lifeitselfii — so that sometimes he stands 
with stopped nostrils before his own self, and, like 
Pope Innocent the Third, makes a black list of 
his own horrors (" unclean generation, loathsome 
nutrition when in the maternal body, badness of 
the matter out of which man develops, awful 
stench, secretion of saliva, urine, and excrement "). 
Nowadays, when suffering is always trotted out 
as the first argument against existence, as its 
most sinister query, it is well to remember the 
times when men judged on converse principles 
because they could not dispense with the infliction 
of suffering, and saw therein a magic of the first 
order, a veritable bait of seduction to life. 

Perhaps in those days (this is to solace the 
weaklings) pain did not hurt so much as it does 
nowadays : any physician who has treated negroes 
(granted that these are taken as representative of 
the prehistoric man) suffering from severe internal 
inflammations which would bring a European, 
even though he had the soundest constitution, 
almost to despair, would be in a position to come 
to this conclusion. Pain has not the same effect 
with negroes. (The curve of human sensibilities 
to pain seems indeed to sink in an extraordinary 
and almost sudden fashion, as soon as one has 
passed the upper ten thousand or ten millions of 
over-civilised humanity, and I personally have no 
doubt that, by comparison with one painful night 
passed by one single hysterical chit of a cultured 
woman, the suffering of all the animals taken 
together who have been put to the question of the 
knife, so as to give scientific answers, are simply 



"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE, •jj'' 

negligible.) ( We may perhaps be allowed to MftlTir^ 
the possibility of the craving for cruelty not neces- 
sarily having become really extinct: it only requires, 
in view of the fact that pain hurts more nowadays, 
a certain sublimation and subtilisation, it must 
especially be translated to the imaginative and 
psychic plane, and be adorned with such smug 
euphemisms, that even the most fastidious and 
hypocritical conscience could never grow sus- 
picious of their real nature (" Tragic pity " is one 
of these euphemisnis :J another is " les nostalgies de 
la croix "). What really raises one's indignation 
against sufferingisTiof~stTfiferhig-4tttriiisicaHy743^ 
thensensete ssncss o f Bu ffertKgT'sucira senselessness, 
However, existed neitHer" in Christianity, which 
interpreted suffering into a whole mysterious 
salvation-apparatus^ fiof^'Tn^the T)eIiefs~'"of l:he 
na?ve"ancient man, wBo only knew how to find a 
meaning in suffering from the standpoint of the 
spectator, or the inflictor of the suffering. In 
QT3er~to get the secret, undiscovered, and un- 
witnessed suffering out of the world it was almost 
compulsory to invent gods and a hierarcKy~of" 
i ntermediate beingsp in short, something which 
wanders even among secret places, sees even in 
the dark, and makes a point of never missing an 
interesting and painful spectacle. It w^is^with. 
t he help of su ch in ventions that li fe got to learn 
\'a& tour de f orce, which hasbecome j)art of its 
st ock-in jrade, thefog^r de force of self-justification, 
of the justification of evil ; nbwadays™th'is"'would 
pertiaps require other Auxiliary devices (for 
instance, life as a riddle, life as a problem of 



yS , THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

knowledge). " Every evil is justified in the sight 
ot which a'god finds edification," so rang the logic 
of primitive sentiment — and, indeed, was it only 
of primitive ? The gods conceived as friends of 
spectacles of cruelty — oh how far does this 
primeval conception extend even nowadays into 
our European civilisation ! One would perhaps 
like in this context to consult Luther and Calvin. 
It is at any rate certain that even the Greeks 
knew no more piquant seasoning for the happiness 
of their gods than the joys of cruelty. What, do 
you think, was the mood with which Homer 
makes his gods look down upon the fates of 
men ? What final meaning have at bottom 
the Trojan War and similar tragic horrors ? It 
is impossible to entertain any doubt on the 
point : they were intended as festival games 
for the gods, and, in so far as the poet is of 
a more godlike breed than other men, as 
festival games also for the poets. It was in just 
this spirit and no other, that at a later date the 
moral philosophers of Greece conceived the eyes 
of God as still looking down on the moral struggle, 
the heroism, and the self-torture of the virtuous; 
the Heracles of duty was on a stage, and was 
conscious of the fact ; virtue without witnesses 
was something quite unthinkable for this nation 
of actors. Must not that philosophic iavention,- 
so audacious and^ so fatal, which was then 
aBsoIutely new to Europe, the . inventioa. of J]^e 
will^" of the absolute spontaneity of man in_good_ 
and evilj_simply havebeen made for the specific^ 
purpose of justifiying the idea, that" the interest of 



" guilt; " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 79 

t he gods in hiimanify and t^ifman virl^iiP— ums-Ji 
ine xhaustibl e ? 

There would never on the stage of this free- 
will world be a dearth of really new, really novel 
and exciting situations, plots, catastrophes. A 
world thought out on completely deterministic 
lines would be easily guessed by the gods, and 
would consequently soon bore them — sufficient 
reason for these friends of the gods, the philo- 
sophers, not to ascribe to their gods such a deter- 
ministic world. The whole of ancient humanity 
is full of delicate consideration for the spectator, 
being as it is a world of thorough publicity and 
theatricality, which could not conceive of happi- 
ness without spectacles and festivals. — And, as 
has already been said, even in great punishment 
there is so much which is festive. 



8. 

The feeling of " ought," of personal obligation 
(to take up again the train of our inquiry), has 
had, as we saw, its origin in the oldest and most 
original personal relationship that there is, the 
relationship between buyer and seller, creditor 
and ower : here it was that individual confronted 
individual, and that individual matched himself 
against individual. There has not yet been found 
a grade of civilisation so low, as not to manifest 
some trace of this relationship. Making prices, 
assessing values, thinking out equivalents, ex- 
changing — all this preoccupied the primal thoughts 
of man to such an extent that in a certain sense 



80 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

it constituted thinking itself : it was here that was 
trained the oldest form of sagacity, it was here in 
this sphere that we can perhaps trace the first 
commencement of man's pride, of his feeling of 
superiority over other animals. Perhaps our 
word " Mensch " (manas) still expresses just some- 
thing of this self-pride : man denoted himself as 
the being who measures values, who values and 
measures, as the "assessing" animal /«r excellence. 
Sale and purchase, together with their psycho- 
logical concomitants, are older than the origins of 
any form of social organisation and union : it is 
rather from the most rudimentary form of indi- 
vidual right that the budding consciousness of 
exchange, commerce, debt, right, obligation, com- 
pensation was first transferred to the rudest and 
most elementary of the social complexes (in their 
relation to similar complexes), the habit of com- 
paring force with force, together with" that~of 
measuring, of calculating. His eye was now 
focussed to this perspective ; and with that ponder- 
ous consistency characteristic of ancient thought, 
which, though set in motion with difficulty, yet 
proceeds inflexibly along the line on which it has 
started, man soon arrived at the great generalisa- 
tion, "everything has its price, all can be paid for," 
the oldest and most naive moral canon ol justice, 
the beginning of all " kindness," of all "equity," of 
all " goodwill," of all " objectivity " in the world. 
/Justice in this initial phase is the goodwill among 
people of about equal power to come to terms with 
each other, to come to an understanding again by 
means of a settlement, and with regard to the less 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 8 1 

powerful, to compel them to agree among them- 
selves to a settlement. I 

9. 

Measured always by the standard of antiquity 
(this antiquity, moreover, is present or again 
possible at all periods), the community stands to 
its members in that important and radical relation- 
ship of creditor to his " owers." Man lives in a 
community, man enjoys the advantages of a com- 
munity (and what advantages ! we occasionally 
underestimate them nowadays), man lives pro- 
tected, spared, in peace and trust, secure from 
certain injuries and enmities, to which the man 
outside the community, the " peaceless " man, is 
exposed, — a German understands the original 
meaning of " Elend " (Slend), — secure because he 
has entered into pledges and obligations to the 
community in respect of these very injuries and 
enmities. What happens when this is not the 
case} The community, the defrauded creditor, 
will get itself paid, as well as it can, one can 
reckon on that. In this case the question of the 
direct damage done by the offender is quite sub- 
sidiary: quite apart from this the criminal* is above 
all a breaker, a breaker of word and covenant to 
the whole, as regards all the advantages and 
amenities of the communal life in which up to 
that time he had participated. The criminal is 
an "ower" who not only fails to repay the 
advances and advantages that have been given to 
him, but even sets out to attack his creditor: 

* German: " Verbrecher." — H.B.S. 
F 



82 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

consequently he is in the future not only, as is 
fair, deprived of all these advantages and amenities 
— he is in addition reminded of the importance of 
those advantages. The wrath of the injured 
creditor, of the community, puts him back in the 
wild and outlawed status from which he was 
previously protected : the community repudiates 
him — and now every kind of enmity can vent 
itself on him. Punishment is in this stage of 
civilisation simply the copy, the mimic, of the 
normal treatment of the hated, disdained, and 
conquered enemy, who is not only deprived of 
every right and protection but of every mercy; 
so we have the martial law and triumphant festival 
of the v<z victis ! in all its mercilessness and 
cruelty. This shows why war itself (counting the 
sacrificial cult of war) has produced all the forms 
under which punishment has manifested itself in 
history. 

ID. 

As it grows more powerful, the community 
/tends to take the offences of the individual less 
seriously, because they are now regarded as being 
much less revolutionary and dangerous to the 
corporate existence : the evil-doer is no more 
outlawed and put outside the pale, the common 
wrath can no longer vent itself upon him with 
its old licence, — on the contrary, from this very 
time it is against this wrath, and particularly 
against the wrath of those directly injured, that 
the evil-doer is carefully shielded and protected 
by the community. As, in fact, the penal law 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 83 

develops, the following characteristics become 
more and more clearly marked : compromise 
with the wrath of those directly affected by the 
misdeed ; a consequent endeavour to localise the 
matter and to prevent a further, or indeed a 
general spread of the disturbance; attempts to 
find equivalents and to settle the whole matter 
{compositid) ; above all, the will, which manifests 
itself with increasing definiteness, to treat every 
offence as in a certain degree capable of being 
paid off, and consequently, at any rate up to a 
certain point, to isolate the offender from his act. 
As the power and the self-consciousness of al' 
community increases, so proportionately does the! 
penal law become mitigated ; conversely every} 
' weakening and jeopardising of the community! 
revives the harshest forms of that law. The 
c redit or has always g rown more human e j>fe- 
portionately as he has grown more rich : finally 
thg_jjso!mtJiLinjur3^he_can_ento 
suffering_becomes the criterio n of his wealth . It i 
is possible to conceive of a society blessed with 
so great a consciousness of its own power as to 
indulg£liLthgr iiiusL_aijbl-Uc i a l £L l u jary Sf'Kt!ing~ 
its wrongjdoers go scot-free. — " What do my 
parasites matter to me ? " might society say. 
" Let them live and flourish ! I am strong 
enough for it." — The justice which began with 
the maxim, " Everything can be paid off, every- 
thing must be paid off," ends with connivance at 
the escape of those who cannot pay to escape — it 
ends, like every good thing on earth, by destroying 
itself. — pThe self-destruction of Justice ! we know 



84 } THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

the pretty name it calls itself — Grace I it remains, 
as is obvious, the privilege of the strongest, better 
still, their super-law. I 

II. 

A deprecatory word here, against, the sttUBptSi 
that have lately been made, to_Jjijd. -th e- origin of — 
justice on quite another^ basis— -namely,jaij_Jtliat_- 
of resentment. Let me whisper a word in the 
ear of the psychologists, if they would fain study 
revenge itself at close quarters : this plant blooms 
its prettiest at present among Anarchists and 
anti-Semites, a hidden flower, as it has ever 
been, like the violet, though, forsooth, with 
another perfume. And as like must necessarily 
emanate from like, it will not be a matter for 
surprise that it is just in such circles that we see 
the birth of endeavours (it is their old birthplace — 
compare above. First Essay, paragraph 14), to 
sanctify revenge under the name oi fusticelas 
though Justice were at bottom merely^ adevglog^ 
ment of the consciousness of injury), .and-thus-, 
with the rehabilitation of revenge to reinstate 
generally and collectively alLthe reactive ^motiona.. 
I object to this last point least of all. It even 
seems meritorious when regarded from the stand- 
point of the whole problem of biology (from 
which standpoint the value of these emotions has 
up to the present been oinderestimated). And 
that to which I alone call attention, is the circum- 
stance that it is the spirit of revenge itself, from 
which develops this new nuance of scientific 
equity (for the benefit of hate, envy, mistrust, 



"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 85 

jealousy, suspicion, rancour, revenge). This 
scientific " equity " stops immediately and makes 
way for the accents of deadly enmity and pre- 
judice, so soon as another group of emotions 
comes on the scene, which in my opinion are of 
a much higher biological value than these re- 
actions, and consequently have a paramount 
claim to the valuation and appreciation of science : 
I mean the really active emotions, such as personal 
and material ambition, and so forth. (E. Diihr- 
ing. Value of Life ; Course of Philosophy, and 
passim^ So much against this tendency in 
general : but as for the particular maxim of 
Diihring's, that the home of Justice is to be found 
in the sphere of the reactive feelings, our love of 
truth compels us drastically to invert his own 
proposition and to oppose to him this other 
maxim : the last sphere conquered by the spirit 
of justice is the sphere of the feeling of reaction ! 
When it really comes about that the just man 
remains just even as regards his injurer (and not 
merely cold, moderate, reserved, indifferent : being 
just is always a positive state) ; when, in spite of 
the strong provocation of personal insult, con- 
tempt, and calumny, the lofty and clear objec- 
tivity of the just and judging eye (whose glance 
is as profound as it is gentle) is untroubled, why 
then we have a piece of perfection, a past master 
of the world — something, in fact, which it would 
not be wise to expect, and which should not at 
any rate be too easily believed. Speaking 
generally, there is no doubt but that even the 
justest individual only requires a little dose of 



86 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

hostility, malice, or innuendo to drive the blood 
into his brain and the fairness from it. Thd 
active man, the att acking, aggressive man is aJway g 
a hiin13re3'^grees nearer to justice than the man 
^who^j^rdji-H^JTie certainly has no need to 
"adopt the tactics, necessary in the case of the 
reacting man, of making false and biassed valua- 
tions of his object. It is, in point of fact, for this 
reason that the aggressive man has at alTTftlies 
enjoyed the "stronger, bolder^ more aristocratic, 
and also freer outlook, "tTie beiier cbhscience.] 
pjn the other hand, we already surmise who it 
really is that has on his conscience the invention 
of the " bad conscience," — the resentful man jj 
Finally, let man look at himself in history. _3n_ 
what sphere up to the present has the whole 
a3milristrat4on-of4aw, the actual need of law, found 
its earthly home ? Perchance in the sphere of 
the reacting man ? Not for a minute : rather fn 
that of the active, strong, spontaneous, aggressive 
rnajij^^ I deliberately defy the above-mentioned 
agitator (who himself makes this self-confession, 
" the creed of revenge has run through all my 
works and endeavours like the red thread of 
Justice "), and say, Jthat judged historically law 
in the wo rld represents the very war ammst 
the reactive Jeelings,"tHe very war waged on those 
feelings by the powers of activity and aggression, 
which devote some of their strength to dam ming" " 
and keeping within bounds this effervescence of 
hysterical reactivity, and tolofcfnglt to some com- 
promise. - Ev«ry where where justice is practised and 
justice is maintained, it is to be observed that the 



87 

s tronger power, when confronted with the weaker 
^wers whiV .h are inferior to it (whether they be 
groups, or individuals), search^^Jiai-JSifiaESJis^to , 
jvut_a n^ end to .the- .s finsdeaa-iLUiy- jaLjceaeotment, 
while it carries on its object, p artly by taking the 
victim of resentment out of the clutches_of revenge, 
p^Qy' by"suTi)'stituting for revenge a campaign of 
its own against the enemies of peace and order, 
partly by finding, suggesting, and occasionally 
enforcing settlements, partly by standardising 
certain equivalents for injuries, to which equivalents 
the element of resentment is henceforth finally 
referred. The most drastic measure, however, 
taken and effectuated by the supreme power, to 
combat the preponderance of the feelings of spite 
and vindictiveness — it takes this measure as soon 
as it is at all strong enough to do so — is the 
foundation of law, the imperative declaration of 
what in its eyes is to be regarded as just and 
lawful, and what unjust and unlawful : and 
while, after the foundation of law, the supreme 
power treats the aggressive and arbitrary acts of 
individuals, or of whole groups, as a violation of 
law, and a revolt against itself, it distracts the 
feelings of its subjects from the immediate injury 
inflicted by such a violation, and thus eventually 
attains the very opposite result to that always 
desired by revenge, which sees and recognises 
nothing but the standpoint of the injured party. 
From henceforth the eye becomes trained to a 
more and more impersonal valuation of the deed, 
even the eye of the injured party himself (though 
this is in the final stage of all, as has been 



88 ' THE GENEALOGY Of MORALS. 

_J 

previously remarked) — on this principle "right" 

and " wrong " first manifest themselves after the 
foundation of law (and not, as Duhring maintains, 
only after the act of violation). To talk of intrinsic! 
right and intrinsic wrong is absolutely nonsensical; 
intrinsically, an injury, an oppression, an exploita- 
tion, an annihilation can be nothing wrong, inas- 
[jnuch as life is essentially (that is, in its cardinal 
[/functions) something which functions by injuring, 
{oppressing, exploiting, and annihilating, and is 
labsolutely inconceivable without such a character] 
It is necessary to make an even more serious 
confession : — viewed from the most advanced 
biological standpoint, conditions of legality can 
be only exceptional conditions, in that they are 
partial restrictions of the real life-will, which 
makes for power, and in that they are subordin- 
ated to the life-will's general end as particular 
means, that is, as means to create larger units of 
strength. A legal organisation, conceived of as 
sovereign and universal, not as a weapon in a 
fight of complexes of power, but as a weapon 
against fighting, generally something after the 
style of Diihring's communistic model of treating 
every will as equal with every other will, would 
be a principle hostile to life, a destroyer and 
dissolver of man, an outrage on the future of man, a 
symptom of fatigue, a secret cut to Nothingness. — 



12. 

A word more on the origin and end of punish- 
ment — two problems which are or ought to be 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 89 

kept distinct, but which unfortunately are usijally 
lumped into one. And what tactics have our" 
moral genealogists employed up to the present in 
these cases ? Their inveterate naivete. They find 
out some " end " in the punishment, for instance, 
revenge and deterrence, and then in all their 
innocence set this end at the beginning, as the 
causa fiendi of the punishment, and — they have 
done the trick. But the patching up of a history 
of the origin of law is the last use to which the 
" End in Law " * ought to be put. Perhaps there 
is no more pregnant principle for any kind of 
ffitoryTKan"tfigTolIowIng, which, difficult though 
it is to master^skoz^d none' 11161633 \i€ mastered 
in eve ry detaif.^:r7T.he origin of the existence of 
a thing a nd its fina l utility, its practical applica- 
tion and incorporation in a system of ends, are 
toio f(^/(? opposed to each other — everything, any- 
tliihg, which exists and which prevails anywhere, 
~"'mlt"^a:tways be put to new purposes by a force 
. superior to._ itself, will be commandeered afresh, 
will be turned and transformed to new uses ; 
all "happening" in the _gigailic.-WDrld- consists of 
overpowe ring and dOnt hrating, and again all over- 
E9iK££mg..and. dP.inination is a new interpretation 
and_a.djustm6nt, which must necessarily obscure or 
absolutely extinguish the subsisting " meaning " 
and " end.^" "The most perfect comprehension 
of the "utility of any physiological organ (or 
also of a legal institution, social custom, political 



* An allusion to DerZweck im Recht, by the great German 
jurist, Professor Ihering. 



9°1 



THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 



Habit, form in art or in religious worship) does 
not for a minute imply any simultaneous com- 
prehension of its origin : this may seem un- 
comfortable and unpalatable to the older men, — 
for it has been the immemorial belief that under- 
standing the final cause or the utility of a thing, 
a form, an institution, means also understanding 
the reason for its origin : to give an example of 
this logic, the eye was made to see, the hand was 
made to grasp. So even punishment was con- 
ceived as invented with a view to punishing. 
But all ends and all utilities are oxAv si£ns^ _ ^fet 
a Will to Power has mastered a less pow erful 
force, has impressed thereon out of its own self 
the meaning of a function ; and the vyhglff, Jllffloq?. 
of a " ThTrig,"" an organ, a custom, can on the 
same principle be regarded as a continuous "sjgn- 
chain " of perpetually iiew interpre.tationa,._and, 
[adjustments, whose causes, so far from needing 
to have even a mutual connection, sometimes 
follow and alternate with each other"'aEsolulely 
haphazard. Similarly, the evolution' of a^^TErngT*" 
of a custom, is anything but its progressus to 
an end, still less a logical and direct progressus 
attained with the minimum expenditure of energy 
«^nd cost : it is rather the succession of processes 
of subjugation,~mbre or less profound, morejBT 
Iess*°mufiiairy independent, which-Tiperate'^orrthe 
tEin"g'Itieir;jj tTs,^further,2the"reg}gtatrce" -w 
each case , invariably displayed^ this subjugat ion, 
the Protean wriggles by way of defence and 
reaction, and, further, the results of successful 
counter-efforts. The form is fluid, but the mean- 



"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. (91 

ing is even more so — e ven insi | de , every ind ividual'' 
organism the case is the same : with every genuine 
growtH of the whole, the ^^Junction^' _of ^he 
individual organs" beconies shifted, — in certain 
cases a partial~perisKiiTg'of these organs, a diminu- 
tion of their numbers (for instance, through 
annihilation of the connecting members), can be 
a symptom of growing strength and perfection. 
What .1 mean is this : even partial loss of 
utiH^j^ decay,^nd_^ degeneratio^lToss of ^ function 
and, purposej_iin_ajword^_ death, appertain__to_^e 
conditions of the genuine progressus ; which always 
appears fn the shape of a will and way to greater 
power, and is always realised at_ the expense _^, 
innumerabl e smaller powers. The magnitude of 
a " progress " is gauged by the greatness of the 
sacrifice that it requires : humanity as a mass 
sacrificed to the prosperity of the one stronger 
species of Man — that would be a progre ss. 3 I 
emphasise all the more this cardinal characteristic 
of the historic method, for the reason that in its 
essence it r uns counter to predominant instincts 
and_prevaiHng taste, which_ much prefer to put up 
with absolute casualness. e ven with the mechanical 
senselessness of all phenomena, than with the theory 
of a power-will, in exhaustive play throughout all 
phenomena. The democratic idiosyncrasy against 
everything which rules and wishes to rule, the 
modern misarchism (to coin a bad word for a bad 
thing), has gradually but so thoroughly trans- 
formed itself into the guise of intellectualism, the 
most abstract intellectualism, that even nowadays 
it penetrates and has the right to penetrate step 



92 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

by step into the most exact and apparently the 
most objective sciences : this tendency has, in 
fact, in my view already dominated the whole of 
physiology and biology, and to their detriment, 
as is obvious, in so far as it has spirited away a 
radical idea, the idea of true activity. The tyranny 



of this idiosyncrasy, however, results injtne theory 
of""adapt-atio » ' ' - b ctng— pusEed forward mto the 
vairtrf^he" argument, exploited ; adaptation — that 
means to say, a second-class activity, a mere 
capacity for " reacting "t; in fact, life itselt has"" 
been defined (by Herbert Spencer) as an in- 
creasingly effec tive internal adaptation to external 
circumstances. r This definition, however, fails to 
realise the reaf essence of life , its will to powerj 
It fails to appreciate _the paramount superiority 
enjoyed by those plastic forces~bf spontaneity, 
aggression, and encroachment" with "TEeir new~~ 
interpre^Ea^tcfRs" and" tendencies, To"the operation* 
of which adaptation is~ only a natural corollary: 
consequently the sovereign_office of UEilMghest 
functionaries' iritTie organism itself (among which 
the life-will appears as an active and forinative 
principle) is repudiated. One remembers Huxley's" 
reproach to Spencer of his " administrative 
Nihilism " : but it is a case of something much 
more than " administration." 



13- 

To return to our subject, namely punishment, 
we must make consequently a double distinction : 
first, the relatively permanent element, the custom, 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 93 

the act, the " drama," a certain rigid sequence of 
methods of procedure ; on the qther hand, the fluid 
element, the meaning, the end, the expectation 
which is attached to the operation of such pro- 
cedure. At this point we immediately assume, 
per analogiam (in accordance with the theory of 
the historic method, which we have elaborated 
above), that the procedure itself is something older 
and earlier than its utilisation in punishment, that 
this utilisation was introduced a.nd interpreted into 
the procedure (which had existed for a long time, 
but whose employment had another meaning), in 
short, that the case is different from that hitherto 
supposed by our naif genealogists of morals and 
of law, who thought that the procedure was 
invented for the purpose of punishment, in the 
same way that the hand had been previously 
thought to have been invented for the purpose 
of grasping. With regard to the other element 
in punishment, its fluid element, its meaning, the 
idea of punishment in a very late stage of civilisa- 
tion (for instance, contemporary Europe) is not 
content with manifesting merely one meaning, 
but manifests a whole synthesis " of meanings." 
The past general history of punishment, the history 
of its employment for the most diverse ends, 
crystallises eventually into a kind of unity, which 
is difficult to analyse into its parts, and which, it 
is necessary to emphasise, absolutely defies defini- 
tion. (It is nowadays impossible to say definitely 
the precise reason for punishment: all ideas, in 
which a whole process is promiscuously compre- 
hended, elude definition ; it is only that which 



94 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

has no history, which can be defined.) At an 
earlier stage, on the contrary, that synthesis of 
meanings appears much less rigid and much more 
elastic ; we can realise how in each individual 
case the elements of the synthesis change their 
value and their position, so that now one element 
and now another stands out and predominates 
over the others, nay, in certain cases one element 
(perhaps the end of deterrence) seems to eliminate 
all the rest. At any rate, so as to give some idea 
of the uncertain, supplementary, and accidental 
nature of the meaning of punishment and of the 
manner in which one identical procedure can be 
employed and adapted for the most diametrically 
opposed objects, I will at this point give a scheme 
that has suggested itself to me, a scheme itself 
based on comparatively small and accidental 
material. — Punishment, as rendering the criminal 
harmless and incapable of further injury. — Punish- 
ment, as compensation for the injury sustained by 
the injured party, in any form whatsoever (including 
the form of sentimental compensation). — Punish- 
ment, as an isolation of that which disturbs the 
equilibrium, so as to prevent the further spreading 
of the disturbance. — Punishment as a means of 
inspiring fear of those who determine and execute 
the punishment. — Punishment as a kind of com- 
pensation for advantages which the wrong-doer has 
up to that time enjoyed (for example, when he is 
utilised as a slave in the mines). — Punishment, as 
the elimination of an element of decay (sometimes 
of a whole branch, as according to the Chinese 
laws, consequently as a means to the purification 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 95 

of the race, or the preservation of a social type). — 
Punishment as a festival, as the violent oppression 
and humiliation of an enemy that has at last been 
subdued. — Punishment as a mnemonic, whether for 
him who suffers the punishment — the so-called 
" correction," or for the witnesses of its administra- 
tion. — Punishment, as the payment of a fee stipu- 
lated for by the power which protects the evil-doer 
from the excesses of revenge. — Punishment, as 
a compromise with the natural phenomenon of 
revenge, in so far as revenge is still maintained 
and claimed as a privilege by the stronger races. — 
Punishment as a declaration and measure of war 
against an enemy of peace, of law, of order, of 
authority, who is fought by society with the 
weapons which war provides, as a spirit dangerous 
to the community, as a breaker of the contract on 
which the community is based, as a rebel, a traitor, 
and a breaker of the peace. 



14. 

This list is certainly not complete ; it is obvious 
that punishment is overloaded with utilities of all 
kinds. This makes it all the more permissible to 
eliminate one supposed utility, which passes, at any 
rate in the popular mind, for its most essential 
utility, and which is just what even now provides 
the strongest support for that faith in punishment 
which is nowadays for many reasons tottering. 
Punishment is supposed to have the value of 
exciting in the guilty the consciousness of guilt ; 
in punishment is sought the proper instrumentum 



g6 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

of that psychic reaction which becomes known as 
a "bad conscience," "remorse." But this theory 
is even, from the point of view of the present, 
a violation of reality and psychology: and how 
much more so is the case when we have to deal 
with the longest period of man's history, his 
primitive history ! Genuine remorse is certainly 
extremely rare among wrong-doers and the victims 
of punishment ; prisons and houses of coiTection 
are not tke soil on which this worm of remorse 
pullulates for choice — this is the unanimous 
opinion of all conscientious observers, who in 
many cases arrive at such a judgment with 
enough reluctance and against their own personal 
wishes. (Speaking generally, punishment hardens 
and numbs, it produces concentration, it sharpens 
the consciousness of alienation, it strengthens the 
power of resistance, j When it happens that it 
breaks the man's energy and brings about a 
piteous prostration and abjectness, such a result 
is certainly even less salutary than the average 
effect of punishment, which is characterised by 
a harsh and sinister doggedness. The thought 
of those prehistoric millennia brings us to the un- 
hesitating conclusion, that it was simply through 
punishment that the evolution of the conscious- 
ness of guilt was most forcibly retarded — at any 
rate in the victims of the punishing power. In 
particular, let us not underestimate the extent to 
which, by the very sight of the judicial and 
executive procedure, the wrong-doer is himself pre- 
vented from feeling that his deed, the character of 
his act, is intrinsically reprehensible : for he sees 



"GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 97 

clearly the same kind of acts practised in the 
service of justice, and then called good, and 
practised with a good conscience ; acts such as 
espionage, trickery, bribery, trapping, the whole 
intriguing and insidious art of the policeman and 
the informer — the whole system, in fact, manifested 
in the different kinds of punishment (a system 
not excused by passion, but based on principle), of 
robbing, oppressing, insulting, imprisoning, rack- 
ing, murdering. — All this he sees treated by his 
judges, not as acts njeriting censure and con- 
demnation in themselves, but only in a particular 
context and application. It was not on this soil 
that grew the " bad conscience," that most sinister 
and interesting plant of our earthly vegetation — 
in point of fact, throughout a most lengthy period, 
no suggestion of having to do with a " guilty 
man " manifested itself in the consciousness of the 
man who judged and punished. One had merely 
to deal with an author of an injury, an irrespons- 
ible piece of fate. And the man himself, on 
whom the punishment subsequently fell like a 
piece of fate, was occasioned no more of an 
"inner pain" than would be occasioned by the 
sudden approach of some uncalculated event, 
some terrible natural catastrophe, a rushing, 
crushing avalanche against which there is no 
resistance. 

IS. 

This truth came insidiously enough to the 
consciousness of Spinoza (to the disgust of his 
commentators, who (like Kuno Fischer, for instance) 
G 



98 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

give themselves no end of trouble to misunder- 
stand him on this point), when one afternoon (as 
he sat raking up who knows what memory) he in- 
dulged in the question of what was really left for 
him personally of the celebrated morsus conscientice 
— Spinoza, who had relegated " good and evil " to 
the sphere of human imagination, and indignantly 
defended the honour of his " free " God against 
those blasphemers who affirmed that God did 
everything sub ratione boni (" but this was tanta- 
mount to subordinating God to fate, and would 
really be the greatest of all absurdities"). For 
Spinoza the world had returned again to that 
innocence in which it lay before the discovery of 
the bad conscience : what, then, had happened to 
the morsus conscienticB ? " The antithesis of 
gaudiutn" said he at last to himself, — " A sadness 
accompanied by the recollection of a past event 
which has turned out contrary to all expecta- 
tion " {Eth. III., Propos. XVIIL Schol. i. ii.). Evil- 
doers have throughout thousands of years felt when 
overtaken by punishment exactly like Spinoza, on 
the subject of their " offence " : " here is some- 
thing which went wrong contrary to my anticipa- 
tion," not " I ought not to have done this." — They 
submitted themselves to punishment, just as one 
submits one's self to a disease, to a misfortune, or 
to death, with that stubborn and resigned fatalism 
which gives the Russians, for instance, even now- 
adays, the advantage over us Westerners, in the 
handling of life. If at that period there was a 
critique of action, the criterion was prudence: 
the real effect of punishment is unquestionably 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 99 

chiefly to be found in a sharpening of the sense of 
prudence, in a lengthening of the memory, in a 
will to adopt more of a policy of caution, sus- 
picion, and secrecy ; in the recognition that there 
are many things which are unquestionably beyond 
one's capacity ; in a kind of improvement in self- 
criticism. The broad effects which can be 
obtained by punishment in man and beast, are 
the increase of fear, the sharpening of the sense 
of cunning, the mastery of the desires : so it is 
that punishment tames man, but does not make 
him " better " — it would be more correct even to 
go so far as to assert the contrary (" Injury makes 
a man cunning," says a popular proverb : so far 
as it makes him cunning, it makes him also bad. 
Fortunately, it often enough makes him stupid). 

16. 

At this juncture I cannot avoid trying to give 
a tentative and provisional expression to my own 
hypothesis concerning the origin of the bad con- 
science : it is difficult to make it fully appreciated, 
and it requires continuous meditation, attention, 

and digestion. T regard the )iad coiTi''tpnrp ag 

tiie^jerious_Jllog§s„,.,ffih^ 

contract under^ the stress of the most, radical 
cha nge whic h he has ever expejieaced.-^r-that . 
c hange, when he found ^himself finally imprisoned 
w ithin the pale of society and_of peaceJ 

Just like the plight of the water-animals, when 
they were compelled either to become land- 
animals or to perish, so was the plight of these 



lOO ) THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

half-animals, perfectly adapted as they were to 
the savage life of war, prowling, and adventure — 
suddenly all their instincts were rendered worthless 
and "switched off." Henceforward they had to 
walk on their feet — "carry themselves," whereas 
heretofore they had been carried by the water: 
a terrible heaviness oppressed them. They 
found themselves clumsy in obeying the simplest 
directions, confronted with this new and unknown 
world they had no longer their old guides — 
the regulative instincts that had led them un- 
consciously to safety — they were reduced, were 
those unhappy creatures, to thinking, inferring, 
carculating," putting together causes andresujts^ 
reduced to that poorest and most eixati£_£ttga» 
.of theirs," their "c'oiisciousnesfi.",. I do not believe 
there was ever in the world such a feeling of 
misery, such a leaden discomfort — further, those 
old instincts had not immediately ceased their 
demands ! Only it was difficult and rarely 
possible to gratify them : speaking broadly, 
they were compelled to satisfy themselves by 
new and, as it were, hole-and-corner methods. 
[All instincts which do not find a vent jwithout,,^ 
.turn inwards — this is what I mean by the^ 
growing. " internalisation " of man : consequently 
we have the first growth in man, of what 
subsequently was called his souLl The whole 

inner world, originally as^ . thin as W it ha'a~ 

been stretched between two layers of skin,_burst 
apart and expanded proportionately, and obtained _ 
depth, breadth, and height, when man's external 
outlet became obstructed. These terrible bul- 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. lOI 

warksjwith^ whyh„the, socig,} organisation .protected 
its elf against the old instincts of freedo m (punish- 
ments belong pre-eminently to these bulwarks), 
brought it about that all those instincts of wild, 
free, pro wling man became turned backwards 
against man himself. Enmity, cruelty, the delidCT^ 
in_p e.rse.cution, in s urprises, ch ange, des^.uctiOQT^ 

thejamiQg-j^lJhgsg„ffl§^i^ ag^'P^t tjasii:.jaaii 

possessors : t his is the origin of the "bad conscience.'j 
It was man, who, lacking external enemies and 
obstacles, and imprisoned as he was Jn , the 
oppressive n arrowhesF^anH^monotony of custom, 
in his own impatience lacerated, persecuted, 
gnawed , frightened, arid Ill-treated himself; it was 
this animal in the hands" of the tamer, which beat 
itself against the bars of its cage ; it was this 
being who, pining and yearning for that desert 
home of which it had been deprived, was com- 
pelled to create out of its own selfi_an.ady.eiiture, 
a torture-chamber, a hazardous and perilous desert 
— it was this foplj this" homesick "and desperate 
prisoner — who invented the " bad conscience." 
But thereby he introduced that most grave and 
sinister illness, from which mankind has not yet 
recovered, the suffering of man from the disease 
called man, as the result of a violent breaking from 
his animal past, the result, as it were, of a spasm- 
odic plunge into a new environment and new con- 
ditions of existence^the result of a declaration^f 
war^gainst the old m?flwefs",;7wHic¥'up'to that 
time had been' the staple of his power, his joy, 
his formidableness. Let us immediately add that 
this fact of an animal ego turning against itself, 



102 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

taking part against itself, produced in the world so 
novel, profound, unheard-of, problematic, inconsist- 
ent, and pregnant a phenomenon, that the aspect of 
the world was radically altered thereby. In sooth, 
only divine spectators could have appreciated the 
drama that then began, and whose end baffles con- 
jecture as yet — a drama too subtle, too wonderful, 
too paradoxical to warrant its undergoing a non- 
sensical and unheeded performance on some 
random grotesque planet ! Henceforth man is to 
be counted as one of the most unexpected and 
sensational lucky shots in the game of the "big 
baby" of Heracleitus, whether he be called Zeus 
or Chance — he awakens on his behalf the interest, 
excitement, hope, almost the confidence, of his 
being the harbinger and forerunner of something, 
of man being no end, but only a stage, an 
interlude, a bridge, a great promise. 



17- 

It is primarily involved in this kypathesisuQf^ 
the origin of the bad conscience, that that alteraj^ 
tion was no gxaduai and no voluntary altststion, 
and that it did .not manifest . itself „as,an^organic 
adaptation to new conditions, but^as^,Ji,_bre^,' 
a jump, a necessity, an inevitable fate, against 
which there was no resistance and neyer a spark 
of rese ntment. And secondarily, that the fitting 
of a hithertolTrichecked and amorphous population 
into a fixed form, starting as it had done iii^n act 
of violence, could only be accomplished by acts 
of violence and nothing else — that the oldest 



"State" appeared consequently as a ghastly 
tyranny, a grinding ruthless piece of machinery, 
which went on working, till this raw material 
of a semi - animal populace was not only 
thoroughly kneaded and elastic, but also moulded. 
I used the word " State " : my meaning is self-/ 
evident, namely, a herd of blonde beasts of prey, c 
race of conquerors and masters, which with all its 
warlike organisation and all its organising power 
pounces with its terrible claws on a population, 
in numbers possibly tremendously superior, but\ 
as yet formless, as yet nomad. Such is the 
origin of the " St ate/^ That fantastic theory that 
"makes it begin'"wiith a contract is, I think, dis- 
posed of. He who can command, he who is a 
master^b y "^natur.e,"., he who comes"oal tEe~scene 
forceful in deed and gesture — what has he to 
^o with contracts ? Such beings defy calculation, 
they come like fate^ without cause, reason, notice, 
excuse, they are there like the lightning is there, 
too terrible, too sudden, too convincing, too 
"different," to be personally even hated. Their 
work is an instinctive creating and impressing , 
of forms, they are the most involuntary, un- 
conscious artists that there are : — their appearance 
produces instantaneously a scheme of sovereignty 
which is live, in which the functions are partitioned 
and apportioned, in which above all no part is 
received or finds a place, until pregnant with a 
" meaning " in regard to the whole. They afe\ 
ignorant of the meaning of guilt, responsibiltiy, ' 
consideration, are these born organisers ; in them 
predominates that terrible artist - egoism, that 



I04 ' THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

gleams like brass, and that .knows itself justified 
to all eternity, in its work||even as a mother in 
her child. It is not in them that there grew 
the bad conscience, that is elementary — but it 
would not have grown without them, repulsive 
growth as it was, it would be missing, had not 
a tremendous quantity of freedom been expelled 
from the world by the stress of their hammer- 
strokes, their artist violence, or been at any 
rate made invisible and, as it were, latent. This 
instinct of freedom forced i nto being laten t-^t~is~ 
already _. clear — this instinct of freedom forced 
back, trodden back, imprisoned ,within its elf, an d 
finally only able tP find vent and relief in itself; 
this, only this, is the beginning of the " bad 
conscience." 



Beware of thinking lightly of this phenomenon, 
by reason of its initial painful ugliness. At 
batt.om it is the s ame active force_^gbich is ai-^pfjjT 
on a more grandiose scale in _ those potent artists 
and organisers, and, builds^ „ states, which here, 
internally, on a smaller and pettierjcale_aQd-5Kith. 
a retrogressive tendency, _ makes itself -a-Jaad-^on- 
science in the " labyrinth of the breast," to use 
Goethe's phrase, and which builds negativ-eJdeals. ; 
it is, I repeat, that identiral in.<^t mct of freedom (to 
use my own language, the will t o power) : only 
the material, on which this force with all its con- 
structive and tyrannous nature is let loose, is here 
man himself, his whole old animal self — and not 
as in the case of that more grandiose and sensa- 



"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE.(^ lOS 

tional phenomenon, the other man, other men. 
This secret self-tyranny, this crueltjj^of_the„aJltist, 
thiis^ delight in giving a form to on e's self as a piece 
of difficult, refractorvj and suffering material, in 

- -. ,,- n-i |-irx~~— ^ <iiin<lliiii J i n''" ii '■'"'"■ n il *" ■■ i"' " "" " " "T '" ' "' " " ' ' "ii^i 

burning in ^ wiU, a critique, a contradiction, a 
contempt, a_ n egation ^..Ihis silUda;~jauad_shastiZ-„ 
labour of love on the part of a soul^whose will is^ 
cloven "Tntwo within itself, which makes itself 
suffer fromaeTigKt"in tfie inffiction of sufifering ; 
this wholly '«c??!?FT5a'd''"consctehce Tias finally (as 
oTie' "already anticipates)— true fountainhead as 
it is of idealism and imagination — produced an 
abundance of" novel ancT amazing T5eaufy^an3 
affirm^tion^^jiiiS perhaps "Kas" really teen thg,,££sJL 
to give b irth to beauty at all. What would 
beauty be, forsooth, if its contradiction had not 
first been presented to consciousness, if the ugly 
had not first said to itself, " I am ugly " ? At 
any rate, after this hint the problem oi how far 
idealism and bea uty can be traced in _such 
opposite ideas as '^ seTflessness" self -denial, self- 
sacrifice, b ecomes less problematical ; and in- 
dubitably in future we shall certainly know the 
real and original character of Ithe delight experi- . 
enced by the self-less, the self-denying, the self- 
sacrificing: this delight is a phase of crueltyj 
[—So much provisionally for the origin of 
' "altruism" as a moral value, and the marking 
out the ground from which this value has grown : 
it^is o nly the bad con science, only the will for,' 
seIfciESiiZIES!!SSSH^rnecessary conditronsj 
for the -existence: of altruism as a value. \ "~ » 



Io6 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

19. 

Undoubtedly the bad conscience is an illness, 
but an illness like pregnancy is an illness. If 
we search out the conditions under which this 
illness reaches its most terrible and sublime 
zenith, we shall see what really first brought 
about its entry into the world. But to do this 
we must take a long breath, and we must first 
of all go back once again to an earlier point 
of view. The relation at civil law of the ower to 
his creditor (which has already been discussed in 
detail), has been interpreted once again (and 
indeed in a manner which historically is exceed- 
ingly remarkable and suspicious) into a relation- 
ship, which is perhaps more incomprehensible to 
us moderns than to any other era ; that is, into 
the relationship of the existing generation to its 
ancestors. Within the original tribal association — 
we are talking of primitive times — each living 
generation recognises a legal obligation towards 
the earlier generation, and particularly towards 
the earliest, which founded the family (and this 
is something much more than a mere sentimental 
obligation, the existence of which, during the 
longest period of man's history, is by no means 
indisputable). There prevails in them the con- 
viction that it is only thanks to sacrifices and 
efforts of their ancestors, that the race persists 
at all — and that this has to be paid back to 
them by sacrifices and services. Thus is recog- 
nised the owing of a debt, which accumulates 
continually by reason of these ancestors never 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. I07 

ceasing in their subsequent life as potent spirits 
to secure by their power new privileges and 
advantages to the race. Gratis, perchance ? But 
there is no gratis for that raw and " mean-souled " 
age. What return can be made? — Sacrifice (at 
first, nourishment, in its crudest sense), festivals, 
temples, tributes of veneration, above all, obedience 
— since all customs are, qu& works of the ancestors, 
equally their precepts and commands — are the 
ancestors ever given enough ? This suspicion 
remains and grows : from time to time it extorts 
a great wholesale ransom, something monstrous 
in the way of repayment of the creditor (the 
notorious sacrifice of the first-born, for example, 
blood, human blood in any case). The fear of 
ancestors and their power, the consciousness of 
owing debts to them, necessarily increases, accord- 
ing to this kind of logic, in the exact proportion 
that the race itself increases, that the race itself 
becomes more victorious, more independent, more 
honoured, more feared. This, and not the con- 
trary, is the fact. Each step towards race decay, all 
disastrous events, all symptoms of degeneration, 
of approaching disintegration, always diminish the 
fear of the founders' spirit, and whittle away the 
idea of his sagacity, providence, and potent presence. 
Conceive this crude kind of logic carried to its 
climax : it follows that the ancestors of the most 
powerful races must, through the growing fear 
that they exercise on the imaginations, grow 
themselves into monstrous dimensions, and become 
relegated to the gloom of a divine mystery that 
transcends invagination — the ancestor becomes at 



I08 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

last necessarily transfigured into a god. Perhaps 
this is the very origin of the gods, that is, an 
origin from fear ! And those who feel bound to 
add, " but from piety also," will have difficulty in 
maintaining this theory, with regard to the 
primeval and longest period of the human race. 
And of course this is even more the case as 
regards the middle period, the formative period 
of the aristocratic races — the aristocratic races 
which have given back with interest to their 
founders, the ancestors (heroes, gods), all those 
qualities which in the meanwhile have appeared 
in themselves, that is, the aristocratic qualities. 
We will later on glance again at the ennobling and 
promotion of the gods (which of course is totally 
distinct from their " sanctification ") : let us now 
provisionally follow to its end the course of the 
whole of this development of the consciousness of 
" owing." 

20. 

According to the teaching of history, the con- 
sciousness of owing debts to the deity by no 
means came to an end with the decay of the 
clan organisation of society ; just as mankind has 
inherited the ideas of " good " and " bad " from 
the race-nobility (together with its fundamental 
tendency towards establishing social distinctions), 
so with the heritage of the racial and tribal gods 
it has also inherited the incubus of debts as yet 
unpaid and the desire to discharge them. The 
transition is effected by those large populations of 
slaves and bondsmen, who, whether through com- 



"GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE, AND THE LIKE. 109 

pulsion or through submission and " mimicry "\ 
have accommodated themselves to the religion of ] 
their masters ; through this channel these inherited 
tendencies inundate the world. iThe feeling of 
owing a debt to the deity has grown continu- 
ously for several centuries, always in the same 
proportion in which the idea of God and the con- 
sciousness of God have grown and become exalted 
among mankind! (The whole history of ethnic 
fights, victories, reconciliations, amalgamations, 
everything, in fact, which precedes the eventual 
classing of all the social elements in each great 
race-synthesis, are mirrored in the hotch-potch 
genealogy of their gods, in the legends of their 
fights, victories, and reconciliations. Progress to- 
wards universal empires invariably means progress 
towards universal deities ; despotism, with its sub- 
jugation of the independent nobility, always paves 
the way for some system or other of monotheism.) 
The appearance of the Christian god, as the record 
god up to this time, has for that very reason 
brought equally into the world the record amount! 
of guilt consciousness. Granted that we have' 
gradually started on the reverse movement, there 
is no little probability in the deduction, based on 
the continuous decay in the belief in the Christian 
god, to the effect that there also already exists a 
considerable decay in the human consciousness of 
owing (ought) ; in fact, we cannot shut our eyes 
to the prospect of the complete and eventual 
triumph of atheism freeing mankind from all 
this feeling of obligation to their origin, their 
causa prima. Atheism and a kind of second 



no THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

innocence complement and supplement each 
other. 

21. 

So much for my rough and preliminary sketch 
of the interrelation of the ideas " ought " (owe) and 
" duty " with the postulates of religion. I have 
intentionally shelved up to the present the actual 
moralisation of these ideas (their being pushed 
back into the conscience, or more precisely the 
interweaving of the bad conscience with the idea 
of God), and at the end of the last paragraph 
used language to the effect that this moralisation 
did not exist, and that consequently these ideas 
had necessarily come to an end, by reason of 
what had happened to their hypothesis, the 
credence in our " creditor," in God. The actual 
facts differ terribly from this theory. It is with 
the moralisation of the ideas " ought " and " duty," 
and with their being pushed back into the bad 
conscience, that comes the first actual attempt to 
reverse the direction of the development we have 
just described, or at any rate to arrest its evolu- 
tion ; it is just at this juncture that the very hope 
of an eventual redemption has to put itself once 
for all into the prison of pessimism, it is at this 
juncture that the eye has to recoil and rebound in 
despair from off an adamantine impossibility, it is 
at this juncture that the ideas " guilt " and " duty " 
have to turn backwards — turn backwards against 
whom? There is no doubt about it; primarily 
against the " ower," in whom the bad conscience 
now establishes itself, eats, extends, and grows 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 1 1 1 

like a polypus throughout its length and breadth, 
all with such virulence, that at last, with the 
impossibility of paying the debt, there becomes 
conceived the idea of the impossibility of paying 
the penalty, the thought of its inexpiability (the 
idea of " eternal punishment ") — finally, too, it 
turns against the " creditor," whether found in the 
causa prima of man, the origin of the human race, 
its sire, who henceforth becomes burdened with a 
curse (" Adam," " original sin," " determination of 
the will "), or in Nature from whose womb man 
springs, and on whom the responsibility for the 
principle of evil is now cast (" Diabolisation of 
Nature"), or in existence generally, on this logic 
an absolute white elephant, with which mankind is 
landed (the Nihilistic flight from life, the demand 
for Nothingness, or for the opposite of existence, 
for some other existence. Buddhism and the like) 
— 'till suddenly we stand before that paradoxical 
and awful expedient, through which a tortured 
humanity has found a temporary alleviation, that 
stroke of genius calledlChristianity : — God person- 
ally immolating himself for the debt of man, God 
paying himself personally out of a pound of his 
own flesh, God as the one being who can deliver 
man from what man had become unable to deliver 
himself — the creditor playing scapegoat for his 
debtor, from love (can you believe it ?), from love 
of his debtor ! . . . J 



The reader will already have conjectured what 
took place on the stage and behind the scenes of 



112 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

this drama. \That will for seltJtor 
verted cruelty of the anijnal man, ,3KhQ,_JtH£asd. 
subjective, and scared -iato introapfijction (encaged 
as he was in " the State," as part pf his taming 
process), invented the„ had_-CQnscience-so-as~t© 
hurt himself, after the natur:al..xmtiet for t[i|p j;;!" 
to hurt, became blocked — in other words, this man 
of the mS" coHscience_ explajte^ ^he religious 
hypothesis so as to ^garry his« martyr^orn to the 
ghastliest pitch of agoriis ed_ intensity. \ Owing 
something to^ God: t his thought be comes his 
instrument of tortmg. He apprehends in God the 
most extreme antitheses that he can find to his 
own characteristic and ineradicable animal instincts, 
he himself gives a new interpretation to these 
animal instincts as being against what he " owes " 
to God (as enmity, rebellion, and revolt against 
the " Lord," the " Father," the " Sire," the " Begin- 
ning of the world "), he places himself between the 
horns of the dilemma,^God "arid " DeviH" Every 
negation which he is inclined to utter to himself; 
to the nature, naturalness, an3 reality of"Kis"bellig;~ 
he whips into an ejaculation of "yes"," uttering it 
as something existing, living, efficlg1!Tt,"'"as beiiig- 
G od.ja s the holiness of God, the judgment of God, 
as the hangmanship of God, as transcendence, as 
eternity, as unending torment, as hell, as infinity 
of punishment and guilt. This is a kind of mad- 
ness of the will in the sphere oTpsychoTogical 
cruelty which is absolutely unparalleled ^— -man's 
wiU to fin^ himgplf gniH-y and-blamewort hv to the 
point of inexpiability, his wi// to think of himself 
as punished, without the punishment evCT^Being 



"3 

able to balance the guil t, his will to infect and to 
poison the fundamental basis of the universe with 
the problem of punishment and guilt, in order to 
cut off once and for all any escape out of this 
labyrinth of " fixed ideas," his will for rearing an 
ideal — that of the " holy God " — face to face with 
which he can have tangible proof of his own un- 
worthiness. Alas for this mad melancholy beast 
man ! What phantasies invade it, what paroxysms 
of perversity, hysterical senselessness, and mental 
bestiality break out immediately, at the very 
slightest check on its being the beast of action. 
All this is excessively interesting, but at the same 
time tainted with a black, gloomy, enervating 
melancholy, so that a forcible veto must be in- 
voked against looking too long into these abysses. 
Here is disease, undubitably, the most ghastly 
disease that has as yet played havoc among men : 
and he who can still hear (but man turns now 
deaf ears to such sounds), how in this night of 
torment and nonsense there has rung out the cry 
of love, the cry of the most passionate ecstasy, of 
redemption in love, he turns away gripped by an 
invincible horror — in man there is so much that 
is ghastly — too long has the world been a mad- 
house.. 

23. 

Let this suffice once for all concerning the origin 
of the " holy God." The fact that in itself the 
conception of gods is not bound to lead necessarily 
to this degradation of the imagination (a temporary 
representation of whose vagaries we felt bound to 
H 



114 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

give), the fact that there exist nobler methods of 
utilising the invention of gods than in this self- 
crucifixion and self-degradation of man, in which 
the last two thousand years of Europe have been 
past masters — these facts can fortunately be still 
perceived from every glance that we cast at the 
/Grecian gods, these mirrors of noble and grandiose 
men, in which the animal in man felt itself deified, 
and did not devour itself in subjective frenzj^ 
These Greeks long utilised their gods as simple 
buffers against the " bad conscience " — so that they 
could continue to enjoy their freedom of soul : 
this, of course, is diametrically opposed to Chris- 
tianity's theory of its god. They went very far 
on this principle, did these splendid and lion- 
hearted children ; and there is no lesser authority 
than that of the Homeric Zeus for making them 
realise occasionally that they are taking life too 
casually. " Wonderful," says he on one occasion 
— it has to do with the case of .(Egistheus, a very 
bad case indeed — 

" Wonderful how they grumble, the mortals against 
the immortals, 
Only from us, they presume, comes evil, but in 

their folly. 
Fashion they, spite of fate, the doom of their 
own disaster." 

Yet the reader will note and observe that this 
Olympian spectator and judge is far from being 
angry with them and thinking evil of them on 
this score. " How foolish they are," so thinks he 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 1 1 5 

of the misdeeds of mortals — and " folly," " im- 
prudence," " a little brain disturbance," and nothing 
more, are what the Greeks, even of the strongest, 
bravest period, have admitted to be the ground of 
much that is evil and fatal. — Folly, not sin, do you 
understand? . . . But even this brain disturbance 
was a problem — " Come, how is it even possible ? 
How could it have really got in brains like ours, 
the brains of men of aristocratic ancestry, of men 
of fortune, of men of good natural endowments, of 
men of the best society, of men of nobility and 
virtue ? " This was the question that for century on 
century the aristocratic Greek put to himself when 
confronted with every (to him incomprehensible) 
outrage and sacrilege with which one of his peers 
had polluted himself. " It must be that a god 
had infatuated him," he would say at last, nodding 
his head. — This solution is typical of the GreeksTl 
. . . accordingly the gods in those times subserved 
the functions of justifying man to a certain extent 
even in evil — in those days they took upon them- 
selves not the punishment, but, what is more 
noble, the guilt. [ 

24. 

I conclude with three queries, as you will see. 
" Is an ideal actually set up he re, orjs^one^pulled^ 
do wn?" I am perhaps asked. . . . But have ye 
"sSSTciently asked yourselves how dear a payment 
hasth e settin g up of every ideal in the worl d" 
e xacted ? T o achieve that consummation how 
much truth must' ^a^a^_^be_lra^^ced3[^^rnns-_ 
understood, how many lies must be sanctified, 



Il6 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

how much conscience has got to be distiirbed, how 
many pounds of " God " have got to be sacrificed 
every time ? To enable a sanctuary^ to b&„set up 
a sanctuary has got to be destroyed : that is a law 
— ^5how"iiTe an instance where it has not been 
fulfilled ! . . . We modern men, we inherit the 
immemorial tradition of vivisecting the conscience, 
and practising cruelty to our animal selves. That 
is the sphere of our most protracted training, 
perhaps of our artistic prowess, at any rate of our 
dilettantism and our perverted taste. I Man has 
for too long regarded his natural proclivities with 
an " evil eye," so that eventually they have become 
in his system affiliated to a bad conscience. A 
converse endeavour would be intrinsically fea sible 
— but who is strong enough to attempt it? — 
namely, to affiliate to the " bad conscience " alt 
those unnatui'-al proclivities, all those transcendentaT 
aspirations, contrary to sense, instinct, nature, and 
animalism — in short, all past and present ideals, 
which are all ideals opposed to life, and_traducing 
the wo rld.] To whom is one to turn nowadays 
with SMc/i hopes and pretensions ? — It is just the 
g-ood men that we should thus bring about our 
ears ; and in addition, as stands to reason, the 
indolent, the hedgers, the vain, the hysterical, the 
tired. . . . What is more offensive or more 
thoroughly calculated to alienate, than giving any 
hint of the exalted severity with which we treat 
ourselves ? And again how conciliatory, how full 
of love does all the world show itself towards us 
so soon as we do as all the world does, and " let 
ourselves go" like all the world. For such a 



" GUILT," " BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE. 1 1 7 



consummation we need spirits of different calibre 
than seems really feasible in this age ; spirits 
rendered potent through wars and victories, to 
whom conquest, adventure, danger, even pain, have 
become a need ; for such a consummation we need 
habituation to sharp, rare air, to winter wanderings, 
to literal and metaphorical ice and mountains ; we 
even need a kind of sublime malice, a supreme 
and most self-conscious insolence of knowledge, 
which is the appanage of great health ; we need (to 
summarise the awful truth) just this great health ! 
Is this even feasible to-day ? . . . But some day, 
in a stronger age than this rotting and intros~pective 
present, must he~Tn sronT^comeTo^^uSj^^eve^ the 
redeemer of great love and scorn, the creative 
spirit, reboiimffing°TyTlie"impetus of KisjDwn force" 
back^gain awayTronPevetyTranscendental plane 
and dimension, he whose solitude is misunder- 
standed of the people, a s though it were a flig ht 
Jrnm rqfilit y ; — whi1p actually it is only his diving, 
burrowing, and penetr ating into reality, sotTTat 
"when he^comes again to the lighT 'Ee''^h at once 
^""^-S 5fe2HLfeyJfes§--®esns Jhg^«(;/(??«^^f(?^ of this 
reality :.. its redem ption from the curse which the 
old ideal has laid upon it. 1 This maiaof tKe'future, 
wholFHiF^^lg' vO-i1T7eaeemjas_fromJthe old ideal, 
as Jie jafilLfroxiil that IdgaT's^ necessary corollary of 
great n ausea, wil l_tojiot hingness, and Nihilism ; 
tKis tocsin of noon and of the great verdict, whiST 
renders the will again free, who gives back to the 
world its goal and to man his hope, this Antichrist 
and Antinihilist, this conqueror of God and of 
Nothingness — he must one day come. \ 



Il8 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

25. 

But what am I talking of? Enough ! Enough ? 
At this juncture I have only one proper course, 
silence : otherwise I trespass on a domain open 
alone to one who is younger than I, one stronger, 
more "future" than I — open alone to Zara- 
thustra, Zarathustra the godless. 



THIRD ESSAY. 

WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC 
IDEALS? 

" Careless, mocking, forceful — so does wisdom wish us : she 
is a woman, and never loves any one but a warrior." 

Thus Spake Zarathustra. 



What is the meaning of ascetic ideals ? In 
artists, nothing, or too much ; in philosophers and 
scholars, a kind of " flair " and instinct for the con- 
ditions most favourable to advanced intellectualism ; 
in women, at best an additional seductive fascina- 
tion, a little morbidezza on a fine piece of flesh, 
the angelhood of a fat, pretty animal ; in physio- 
logical failures and whiners (in the majority of 
mortals), an attempt to pose as " too good " for this 
world, a holy form of debauchery, their chief 
weapon in the battle with lingering pain and 
ennui ; in priests, the actual priestly faith, their best 
engine of power, and also the supreme authority 
for power ; in saints, finally a pretext for hiberna- 
tion, their novissima glories cupido, their peace in 
nothingness (" God "), their form of madness. 

But in the very fact that the ascetic ideal has 
meant so much to man, lies expressed the funda- 
mental featare of man's will, his horror vacui: he 
needs a ^«'g/-^rr.^od.,ii will, sooner will Incinilngness 
dian not will at all.-^- Am I_J3ot__ understpoji ?^— 
Have I not been understood ? — " Certainly not, 
sir ? "^^Wgll, Jet us begin. at- lh e -J a eg Janing. 



2. 

What is the meaning of ascetic ideals ? Or, to 
take an individual case in regard to which I have 



122 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

often been consulted, what is the meaning, for 
example, of an artist like Richard Wagner paying 
homage to chastity in his old age ? He had 
always done so, of course, in a certain sense, but 
it was not till quite the end, that he did so in 
an ascetic sense. What is the meaning of this 
" change of attitude," this radical revolution in his 
attitude — for that was what it was? Wagner 
veered thereby straight round into his own opposite. 
What is the meaning of an artist veering round 
into his own opposite? At this point (granted 
that we do not mind stopping a little/Over this 
question), we immediately call to xamd the best, 
strongest, gayest, and boldest period, that there 
perhaps ever was in Wagner's life : that was the 
period when he was genuinely and deeply 
occupied with the idea of " Luther's Wedding." 
Who knows what chance is responsible for our 
now having the Meistersingers instead of this 
wedding music ? And how much in the latter is 
perhaps just an echo of the former ? But there 
is no doubt but that the theme would have dealt 
with the praise of chastity. And certainly it 
would also have dealt with the praise of sensuality, 
and even so, it would seem quite in order, and 
even so, it would have been equally Wagnerian. 
For there is no necessary antithesis between 
chastity and sensuality : every j [ood rnarriagg, 

every authentic^ hear t-felt love trans cgnda this 

antithesis. Wagner wouI3, it seems to me, have 

~3one well'lo have brought this pleasing reality 

home once again to his Germans, by means of a 

bold and graceful " Luther Comedy," for there 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 23 

were and are among the Germans many revilers 
of sensuality ; and perhaps Luther's greatest merit 
lies just in the fact of his having had the courage 
of his sensuality (it used to be called, prettily 
enough, " evangelistic freedom "). But even in 
those cases where that antithesis between chastity 
and sensuality does exist, there has fortunately 
been for some time no necessity for it to be in 
any way a tragic antithesis. This should, at any 
rate, be the case with all beings who are sound 
in mind and body, who are far from reckoning 
their delicate balance between " animal " and 
"angel," as being on the face of it one of the 
principles opposed to existence — the most subtle 
and brilliant spirits, such as Goethe, such as Hafiz, 
have even seen in this a further charm of life. 
Such " conflicts " actually allure one to life. On 
the other hand, it is only too clear that when 
once these ruined swine are reduced to worshipping 
chastity — and there are such swine — they only 
see and worship in it the antithesis to themselves, 
the antithesis to ruined swine. Oh what a tragic 
grunting and eagerness ! You can just think of 
it — they worship that painful and superfluous 
contrast, which Richard Wagner in his latter days 
undoubtedly wished to set to music, and to place 
on the stage ! " For what purpose, forsooth f " 
as we may reasonably ask. What did the swine 
matter to him ; what do they matter to us ? 

3. 
At this point it is impossible to beg the 
further question of what he really had to do with 



124 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

that manly (ah, so unmanly) country bumpkin, 
that poor devil and natural, Parsifal, whom he 
eventually made a Catholic by such fraudulent 
devices. What? Was this Parsifal really meant 
seriously "i One might be tempted to suppose 
the contrary, even to wish it — that the Wagner- 
ian Parsifal was meant joyously, like a concluding 
play of a trilogy or satyric drama, in which 
Wagner the tragedian wished to take farewell of 
us, of himself, above all of tragedy, and to do so in 
a manner that should be quite fitting and worthy, 
that is, with an excess of the most extreme and 
flippant parody of the tragic itself, of the ghastly 
earthly seriousness and earthly woe of old — a 
parody of that most crude phase in the unnatural- 
ness of the ascetic ideal, that had at length been 
overcome. That, as I have said, would have been 
quite worthy of a great tragedian ; who like every 
artist first attains the supreme pinnacle of his 
greatness when he can look down into himself and 
his art, when he can laugh at himself. Is Wagner's 
Parsifal his secret laugh of superiority over 
himself, the triumph of that supreme artistic 
freedom and artistic transcendency which he has 
at length attained. We might, I repeat, wish it 
were so, for what can Parsifal, taken seriously, 
amount to? Is it really necessary to see in it 
(according to an expression once used against me) 
the product of an insane hate of knowledge, mind, 
and flesh ? A curse on flesh and spirit in one 
breath of hate ? An apostasy and reversion to the 
morbid Christian and obscurantist ideals? And 
finally a self-negation and self-elimination on the 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 12$ 

part of an artist, who till then had devoted all the 
strength of his will to the contrary, namely, the 
highest artistic expression of soul and body. And 
not only of his art ; of his life as well. Just 
remember with what enthusiasm Wagner followed 
in the footsteps of Feuerbach. Feuerbach's motto 
of "healthy sensuality" rang in the ears of 
Wagner during the thirties and forties of the 
century, as it did in the ears of many Germans 
(they dubbed themselves " Young Germans "), like 
the word of redemption. Did he eventually 
change his mind on the subject ? For it seems at 
any rate that he eventually wished to change his 
teaching on that subject . . . and not only is 
that the case with the Parsifal trumpets on the 
stage : in the melancholy, cramped, and em- 
barrassed lucubrations of his later years, there 
are a hundred places in which there are manifesta- 
tions of a secret wish and will, a despondent, 
uncertain, unavowed will to preach actual retro- 
gression, conversion, Christianity, mediaevalism, 
and to say to his disciples, " All is vanity ! Seek 
salvation elsewhere ! " Even the " blood of the 
Redeemer " is once invoked. 



Let me speak out my mind in a case like this, 
which has many painful elements — and it is a 
typical case : it is certainly best to separate an 
artist from his work so completely that he can- 
not be taken as seriously as his work. He is 
after all merely the presupposition of his work 



126 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

the womb, the soil, in certain cases the dung and 
manure, on which and out of which it grows — 
and consequently, in most cases, something that 
must be forgotten if the work itself is to be en- 
joyed. The insight into the origin of a work is 
a matter for psychologists and vivisectors, but 
never either in the present or the future for the 
aesthetes, the artists. The author and creator 
of Parsifal was as little spared the necessity of 
sinking and living himself into the terrible depths 
and foundations of medieval soul-contrasts, the 
necessity of a malignant abstraction from all 
intellectual elevation, severity, and discipline, the 
necessity of a kind of mental perversity (if the 
reader will pardon me such a word), as little as 
a pregnant woman is spared the horrors and 
marvels of pregnancy, which, as I have said, must 
be forgotten if the child is to be enjoyed. We 
must guard ourselves against the confusion, into 
which an artist himself would fall only too easily 
(to employ the English terminology) out of 
psychological " contiguity " ; as though the artist 
himself actually were the object which he is able 
to represent, imagine, and express. In point of fact, 
the position is that even if he conceived he were 
such an object, he would certainly not represent, 
conceive, express it. Homer would not have 
created an Achilles, nor Goethe a Faust, if Homer 
had been an Achilles or if Goethe had been a Faust. 
A complete and perfect artist is to all eternity 
separated from the " real," from the actual ; on 
the other hand, it will be appreciated that he can 
at times get tired to the point of despair of this 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 1 27 

eternal " unreality " and falseness of his inner- 
most being — and that he then sometimes 
attempts to trespass on to the most forbidden 
ground, on reality, and attempts to have real 
existence. With what success? The success will 
be guessed — it is the typical velleity of the artist ; 
the same velleity to which Wagner fell a victim 
in his old age, and for which he had to pay so 
dearly and so fatally (he lost thereby his most 
valuable friends). But after all, quite apart from 
this velleity, who would not wish emphatically 
for Wagner's own sake that he had taken fare- 
well of us and of his art in a different manner, 
not with a Parsifal, but in more victorious, more 
self-confident, more Wagnerian style — a style 
less misleading, a style less ambiguous with regard 
to his whole meaning, less Schopenhauerian, less 
Nihilistic? . . . 



What, then, is the meaning of ascetic ideals ? 
In' the case of an artist we are getting to under- 
sraflg^heir . iaeamiig_^:„J\7i2^g^ at all . . . or so 
much that it is as good as nothing at all. Indeed, 
what is the use of them ? Our artists have for a 
long time past not taken up a sufficiently inde- . 
pendent attitude, either in the world or against it, 
to warrant their valuations and the changes in 
these valuations exciting interest. At all times 
they have played the valet of some morality, 
philosophy, or religion, quite apart from the fact 
that unfortunately they have often enough been 
the inordinately supple courtiers of their clients 



128 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

and patrons, and the inquisitive toadies of the 
powers that are existing, or even of the new 
powers to come. To put it at the lowest, they 
always need a rampart, a support, an already 
constituted authority : artists never stand by 
themselves, standing alone is opposed to their 
deepest instincts. So, for example, did Richard 
Wagner take, " when the time had come," the 
philosopher Schopenhauer for his covering man 
in front, for his rampart. Who would consider 
it even thinkable, that he would have had the 
courage for an ascetic ideal, without the support 
afforded him by the philosophy of Schopenhauer, 
without the authority of Schopenhauer, which 
dominated Europe in the seventies ? (This is 
without consideration of the question whether an 
artist without the milk * of an orthodoxy would 
have been possible at all.) This brings us to the 
more serious question : What is _ the meaning of 
a real philosopher paying homage to the ascetic 
ideal, a really self-dependent intellect like Schcr-'' 
penhauer, a man and knight with a glance of 
bronze, who has the courage to be himself, who 
knows how to stand alone without first waiting 
for men who cover him in front, and the nods of 
his superiors ? Let us now consider at once the 
remarkable attitude of Schopenhauer towards art, 
an attitude which has even a fascination for 
certain types. For that is obviously the reason 
why Richard Wagner all at once went over to 



* An allusion to the celebrated monologue in William 
Tell. 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 1 29 

Schopenhauer (persuaded thereto, as one knows, 
by a poet, Herwegh), went over so completely that 
there ensued the cleavage of a complete theoretic 
contradiction between his earlier and his later 
aesthetic faiths — the earlier, for example, being 
expressed in Opera and Drama, the later in the 
writings which he published from 1870 onwards. 
In particular, Wagner from that time onwards (and 
this is the volte-face which alienates us the most) 
had no scruples about changing his judgment con- 
cerning the value and position of music itself. 
What did he care if up to that time he had made 
of music a means, a medium, a " woman," that in 
order to thrive needed an end, a man — that is, the 
drama ? He suddenly realised that more could be 
effected by the novelty of the Schopenhauerian 
theory in majorem musiccs gloriam — that is to say, 
by means of the sovereignty of music, as Schopen- 
hauer understood it ; music abstracted from and 
opposed to all the other arts, music as the in- 
dependent art-in-itself, not like the other arts, 
affording reflections of the phenomenal world, but ■ 
rather the language of the will itself, speaking 
straight out of the " abyss " as its most personal, 
original, and direct manifestation. This extra- 
ordinary rise in the value of music (a rise which 
seemed to grow out of the Schopenhauerian 
philosophy) was at once accompanied by an un- 
precedented rise in the estimation in which the 
musician himself was held : he became now an 
oracle, a priest, nay, more than a priest, a kind of 
mouthpiece for the " intrinsic essence of things," 
a telephone from the other world — from hence- 



I30 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

forward he talked not only music, did this 
ventriloquist of God, he talked metaphysic ; 
what wonder that one day he eventually talked 
ascetic ideals. 



Schopenhauer has made use of the Kantian treat- 
ment of the esthetic problem — though he certainly 
did not regard it with the Kantian eyes. Kant 
thought that he showed honour to art when he 
favoured and placed in the foreground those of 
the predicates of the beautiful, which constitute 
the honour of knowledge : impersonality and uni- 
versality. This is not the place to discuss whether 
this was not a complete mistake ; all that I wish 
to emphasise is that Kant, just like other philo- 
sophers, instead of envisaging the esthetic prob- 
lem from the standpoint of the experiences of 
the artist (the creator), has only considered art and 
beauty from the standpoint of the spectator, and 
has thereby imperceptibly imported the spectator 
himself into the idea of the " beautiful " ! But if 
only the philosophers of the beautiful had suffi- 
cient knowledge of this "spectator"! — Know- 
ledge of him as a great fact of personality, as a 
great experience, as a wealth of strong and most 
individual events, desires, surprises, and raptures 
in the sphere of beauty ! But, as I feared, the 
contrary was always the case. And so we get 
from our philosophers, from the very beginning, 
definitions on which the lack of a subtler personal 
experience squats like a fat worm of crass error, 
as it does on Kant's famous definition of the 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 3 1 

beautiful. " That is beautiful," says Kant, " which 
pleases without interesting." Without interesting ! 
Compare this definition with this other one, made 
by a real " spectator " and " artist " — by Stendhal, 
who once called the beautiful une promesse de 
honheur. Here, at any rate, the one point which 
Kant makes prominent in the aesthetic position 
is repudiated and eliminated — le desinteressement. 
Who is right, Kant or Stendhal ? When, forsooth, 
our aesthetes never get tired of throwing into the 
scales in Kant's favour the fact that under the 
magic of beauty men can look at even naked 
female statues " without interest," we can certainly 
laugh a little at their expense : — in regard to this 
ticklish point the experiences of artists are more 
" interesting," and at any rate Pygmalion was not 
necessarily an " unsesthetic man." Let us think 
all the better of the innocence of our aesthetes, 
reflected as it is in such arguments ; let us, for 
instance, count to Kant's honour the country- 
parson na'lvet^ of his doctrine concerning the 
peculiar character of the sense of touch ! And 
here we come back to Schopenhauer, who stood 
in much closer neighbourhood to the arts than 
did Kant, and yet never escaped outside the pale 
of the Kantian definition ; how was that ? The 
circumstance is marvellous enough : he interprets 
the expression, " without interest," in the most 
personal fashion, out of an experience which must 
in his case have been part and parcel of his 
regular routine. On few subjects does Schopen- 
hauer speak with such certainty as on the work- 
ing of aesthetic contemplation : he says of it that 



132 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

it simply counteracts sexual interest, like lupulin 
and camphor ; he never gets tired of glorifying 
this escape from the " Life-will " as the great 
advantage and utility of the sesthetic state. In 
fact, one is tempted to ask if his fundamental 
conception of Will and Idea, the thought that 
there can only exist freedom from the " will " by 
means of " idea," did not originate in a generalisa- 
tion from this sexual experience. (In all questions 
concerning the Schopenhauerian philosophy, one 
should, by the bye, never lose sight of the con- 
sideration that it is the conception of a youth ol 
twenty-six, so that it participates not only in 
what is peculiar to Schopenhauer's life, but in 
what is peculiar to that special period of his life.) 
Let us listen, for instance, to one of the most 
expressive among the countless passages which 
he has written in honour of the aesthetic state 
( World as Will and Idea, i. 231); let us listen to 
the tone, the suffering, the happiness, the gratitude, 
with which such words are uttered : " This is the 
painless state which Epicurus praised as the 
highest good and as the state of the gods; we 
are during that moment freed from the vile pres- 
sure of the will, we celebrate the Sabbath of the 
will's hard labour, the wheel of Ixion stands still." 
What vehemence of language ! What images of 
anguish and protracted revulsion ! How almost 
pathological is that temporal antithesis between 
" that moment " and everything else, the " wheel 
of Ixion," " the hard labour of the will," " the vile 
pressure of the will." But granted that Schopen- 
hauer was a hundred times right for himself 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 133 

personally, how does that help our insight into 
the nature of the beautiful ? Schopenhauer has 
described one effect of the beautiful, — the calming 
of the will, — but is this effect really normal ? 
As has been mentioned, Stendhal, an equally 
sensual but more happily constituted nature than 
Schopenhauer, gives prominence to another effect 
of the " beautiful." " The^ beautiful promises 
happiness.'' To him it is just the excitement "oT'the 
"will "(tp "^interest "£j)j;;J^lJbeaHty ^tfiitLieisii" 
the essential fact. And does not Schopenhauer 
ultimately lay himself open to the objection, that 
he is quite wrong in regarding himself as a Kantian 
on this point, that he has absolutely failed to 
understand in a Kantian sense the Kantian 
definition of the beautiful — ;that the beautiful 
pleased him as well by means^ of _an interest, by 
means, in fact, of the strongest and most personal 
interest of all, that: of the victim of torture who 
escapes ^from his torture? — And to come back 
again to our first question, " What is the meaning 
of a philosopher paying homage to ascetic ideals ? " 
We geFiiow, afany rate, a first hintj_he wishes to 
escape from, a torture. 



Let us beware of making dismal faces at the 
word " torture "—there is certainly in this case 
enough to deduct, enough to discount — there is 
even something to laugh at. For we must 
certainly not underestimate the fact that Scho- 
penhauer, who in practice treated sexuality as a 



134 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

personal enemy (including its tool, woman, that 
" instrumentum diaboli "), needed enemies to keep 
him in a good humour ; that he loved grim, bitter, 
blackish-green words ; that he raged for the sake 
of raging, out of passion ; that he would have 
grown ill, would have become a pessimist (for he 
was not a pessimist, however much he wished to 
be), without his enemies, without Hegel, woman, 
sensuality, and the whole " will for existence " 
" keeping on." Without them Schopenhauer 
would not have " kept on," that is a safe wager ; he 
would have run away : but his enemies held him 
fast, his enemies always enticed him back again 
to existence, his wrath was just as theirs' was to 
the ancient Cynics, his balm, his recreation, his 
recompense, his remedium against disgust, his 
happiness. So much with regard to what is most 
personal in the case of Schopenhauer ; on the 
other hand, there is still much which is typical 
in him — and only now we come back to our 
problem. It is a n ac cepted and indisputable fact, 

^O long as thprp arp pTiilngnpliprc: jn^HT?|^ffff]7an? 

wherever philosophers have_existed (from India 
fo England, to take the opposite poles of philo- 
sophic ability), that there exists a,..jcmlJrritatio»- 
andj:ancour on the part of philosoghas.towards_ 
sensyality^^ Schopenhauer is merely the most 
eloquent, and if one has the ear for it, also the 
most fascinating and enchanting outburst. There ^ 
similarly exists a real philosophic bias and affection 
for the whole ascetic ideal; there should ""tjeTio 
illusions on this score. Both these feelingspas 
has been said, belong to the type ; if a philosopher 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? I35 

lacks both of them, then he is — you may be 
certain of it — never anything but a "pseudo." 
What does this mean ? For this state of affairs 
must first be, interpreted : in itself it stands there 
stupid, to all eternity, like any " Thing-in-itself." 
Every animal, includingY« hete pMlosophe,'&TL'ves 
inslinctively after an optimum of favourable con- 
ditions^ un(ier which he can let his whole strength 
have play, and achieves his maximum conseious- 
ness" of power ; witti equal instinctiveness, and 
with a fine perceptive flair which is superior to 
any reason, every animal shudders mortally at 
every kind of disturbance and hindrance which 
obstructs or could obstruct his way to ^zX optimum 
(it is not his way to happiness of which I am 
talking, but his way to power, to action, the most 
powerful action, and in point of fact in many 
cases his way to unhappiness). Similarly, the 
philosopher shudders mortally at marriage, to^dCcv&t 
with all that could persuade him to it — marriage 
as a fatal hindrance on the way to the optimum. 
Up to the present what great philosophers have 
been married? Heracleitus, Plato, Descartes, 
Spinoza, Leibnitz, Kant, Schopenhauer — they 
were not married, and, further, one cannot im.agine 
them as married. A married philosopher belongs 
to comedy, that is my rule ; as for that exception 
of a Socrates — the malicious Socrates married 
himself, it seems, ironice, just to prove this very 
rule. Every philosopher would say, as Buddha 
said, when the birth of a son was announced to 
him : " R^houla has been born to me, a fetter 
has been forged for me" (Rahoula means here 



136 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

" a little demon ") ; there must come an hour of 
reflection to every " free spirit " (granted that he 
has had previously an hour of thoughtlessness), 
just as one came once to the same Buddha : 
" Narrowly cramped," he reflected, " is life in the 
house ; it is a place of uncleanness ; freedom is 
found in leaving the house." Because he thought 
like this, he left the house. So many bridges to 
independence are shown in the ascetic idea], that 
the philosopher cannot refrain from exultation and 
clapping of hands when he hears the history of all 
those resolute ones, who on one day uttered a nay 
to all servitude and went into some desert; even 
granting that they were only strong asses, and 
the absolute opposite of strong minds. What, 
then, does the ascetic ideal mean in a philosopher ? 
This is my answer — it will have been guessed 
long ago : when he sees this ideal the philosopher 
smiles because he sees therein an optimum of the 
conditions of the highest and boldest intellectu- 
ality ; he does not thereby deny " existence," he 
rather affirms thereby his existence and only his 
existence, and this perhaps to the point of not 
being far off the blasphemous ■w\^,pereat mundus, 
fiat philosophia, fiat philosophus, fiant ! . . . 



8. 

These philosophers, you see, are by no means 
uncorrupted witnesses and judges of the value of 
the ascetic ideal. They think of themselves — what 
is the " saint " to them ? They think of that which 
to them personally is most indisgensaBleT of 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 37 

freedCTiJrojm compulsion, disturbance, noise : free- 
donTlrom^ business ,. duties, cares-^-Qfa clear b.ead ; 
ofthedance, spring, and flight of thoughts ; of good 
air — rare, clear, free, dry, as is the air on the heights, 
in which every animal creature becomes more in- 
tellectual and gains wings ; they think of peace in 
every cellar ; all the hounds neatly chained ; no 
baying of enmity and uncouth rancour ; no remorse 
of wounded ambition ; quiet and submissive in • 
ternal organs, busy as mills, but unnoticed ; the 
heart alien, transcendent, future, posthumous — to 
summarise, they mean by the ascetic ideal the 
joyous asceticism of a deified and newly fledged 
animal, sweeping over life rather than resting. We 
know what are the three great catch-words of the 
ascetic ideal : poverty, humility, chastity ; and now 
just look closely at the life of all the great fruitful 
inventive spirits — you will always find again and 
again these three qualities up to a certain extent. 
Not for a minute, as is self-evident, as though, per- 
chance, they were part of their virtues — what has 
this type of man to do with virtues ? — but as the 
most essential and natural conditions of their best 
existence, their finest fruitfulness. In this connec- 
tion it is quite possible that their predominant 
intellectualism had first to curb an unruly and 
irritable pride, or an insolent sensualism, or that it 
had all its work cut out to maintain its wish for the 
"desert" against perhaps an inclination to luxury 
and dilettantism, or similarly against an extravagant 
liberality of heart and hand. But their intellect did 
effect all this, simply because it was the dominant 
instinct, which carried through its orders in the case 



138 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

of all the other instincts. It effects it still ; if it 
ceased to do so, it would simply not be dominant. 
But there is not one iota of " virtue " in all this- 
Further, the desert, of which I just spoke, in which 
the strong, independent, and well-equipped spirits 
retreat into their hermitage — oh, how different is it 
from the cultured classes' dream of a desert ! In 
certain cases, in fact, the cultured classes themselves 
are the desert. And it is certain that all the actors 
of the intellect would not endure this desert for a 
minute. It is nothing like romantic and Syrian 
enough for them, nothing like enough of a stage 
desert ! Here as well there are plenty of asses, but 
at this point the resemblance ceases. But a desert 
nowadays is something like this — perhaps a de- 
liberate obscurity ; a getting-out-of the way of one's 
self; a fear of noise, admiration, papers, influence; 
a little office, a daily task, something that hides 
rather than brings to light ; sometimes associating 
with harmless, cheerful beasts and fowls, the sight of 
which refreshes ; a mountain for company, but not 
a dead one, one with eyes (that is, with lakes) ; in 
certain cases even a room in a crowded hotel where 
one can reckon on not being recognised, and on being 
able to talk with impunity to every one : here is the 
desert — oh, it is lonely enough, believe me ! I grant 
that when Heracleitus retreated to the courts and 
cloisters of the colossal temple of Artemis, that 
" wilderness " was worthier ; why do we lack such 
temples ? (perchance we do not lack them : I just 
think of my splendid study in the Piazza di San 
Marco, in spring, of course, and in the morning, 
between ten and twelve). But that which Herac- 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 1 39 

leitus shunned is still just what we too avoid now- 
adays: the noise and democratic babble of the 
Ephesians, their politics, their news from the 
" empire " (I mean, of course, Persia), their market- 
trade in " the things of to-day " — for there is one 
thing from which we philosophers especially need 
a rest — from the things of " to-day." We honour 
the silent, the cold, the noble, the far, the past, every- 
thing, in fact, at the sight of which the soul is not 
bound to brace itself up and defend itself — some- 
thing with which one can speak without speaking 
aloud. Just listen now to the tone a spirit has when 
it speaks ; every spirit has its own tone and loves 
its own tone. That thing yonder, for instance, is 
bound to be an agitator, that is, a hollow head, a 
hollow mug : whatever may go into him, everything 
comes back from him dull and thick, heavy with the 
echo of the great void. That spirit yonder nearly 
always speaks hoarse : has he, perchance, thought 
himself hoarse ? It may be so — ask the physiolo- 
gists — but he who thinks in words, thinks as a 
speaker and not as a thinker (it shows that he does 
not think of objects or think objectively, but only of 
his relations with objects — that, in point of fact, he 
only thinks of himself and his audience). This third 
one speaks aggressively, he comes too near our body, 
his breath blows on us — we shut our mouth involun- 
tarily, although he speaks to us through a book : the 
tone of his style supplies the reason — he has no 
time, he has small faith in himself, he finds expres- 
sion now or never. But a spirit who is sure of him- 
self speaks softly ; he seeks secrecy, he lets himself 
be awaited, A philosopher is recognised by the 



I40 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

fact that he shuns three brilliant and noisy things — 
fame, princes, and women : which is not to say that 
they do not come to him. He shuns every glaring 
light : therefore he shuns his time and its "daylight." 
Therein he is as a shadow ; the deeper sinks the sun, 
the greater grows the shadow. As for his humility, 
he endures, as he endures darkness, a certain de- 
pendence and obscurity : further, he is afraid of the 
shock of lightning, he shudders at the insecurity 
of a tree which is too isolated and too exposed, on 
which every storm vents its temper, every temper 
its storm. His " maternal " instinct, his secret love 
for that which grows in him, guides him into states 
where he is relieved from the necessity of taking 
care of himself, in the same way in which the 
" mother " instinct in woman has thoroughly main- 
tained up to the present woman's dependent position. 
After all, they demand little enough, do these philo- 
sophers, their favourite motto is, " He who possesses 
is possessed." All this is noi, as I must say again 
and again, to be attributed to a virtue, to a meri- 
torious wish for moderation and simplicity; but 
because their supreme lord so demands of them, 
demands wisely and inexorably ; their lord who is 
eager only for one thing, for which alone he musters, 
and for which alone he hoards everything — time, 
strength, love, interest. This kind of man likes not 
to be disturbed by enmity, he likes not to be dis- 
turbed by friendship, it is a type which forgets or 
despises easily. It strikes him as bad form to play 
the martyr, " to suffer for truth " — he leaves all that 
to the ambitious and to the stage-heroes of the 
intellect, and to all those, in fact, who have time 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? I4I 

enough for such luxuries (they themselves, the 
philosophers, have something to do for truth). They 
make a sparing use of big words ; they are said to 
be adverse to the word "truth" itself: it has a 
" high falutin' " ring. Finally, as far as the chastity 
of philosophers is concerned, the fruitfulness of this 
type of mind is manifestly in another sphere than 
that of children ; perchance in some other sphere, 
too, they have the survival of their name, their little 
immortality (philosophers in ancient India would 
express themselves with still greater boldness : " Of 
what use is posterity to him whose soul is the 
world ? "). In this attitude there is not a trace of 
chastity, by reason of any ascetic scruple or hatred 
of the flesh, any more than it is chastity for an athlete 
or a jockey to abstain from women ; it is rather the 
will of the dominant instinct, at any rate, during the 
period of their advanced philosophic pregnancy. 
Every artist knows the harm done by sexual inter- 
course on occasions of great mental strain and 
preparation ; as far as the strongest artists and 
those with the surest instincts are concerned, this is 
not necessarily a case of experience — hard experi- 
ence — but it is simply their "maternal" instinct 
which, in order to benefit the growing work, disposes 
recklessly (beyond all its normal stocks and supplies) 
of the vigour of its animal life ; the greater power 
then absorbs the lesser. Let us now apply this in- 
terpretation to gauge correctly the case of Schopen- 
hauer, which we have already mentioned : in his 
case, the sight of the beautiful acted manifestly like 
a resolving irritant on the chief power of his nature 
(the power of contemplation and of intense pene- 



142 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

tration) ; so that this strength exploded and became 
suddenly master of his consciousness. But this by 
no means excludes the possibility of that particular 
sweetness and fulness, which is peculiar to the 
cEsthetic state, springing directly from the ingredient 
of sensuality (just as that " idealism " which is 
peculiar to girls at puberty originates in the same 
source) — it may be, consequently, that sensuality is 
not removed by the approach of the aesthetic state, 
as Schopenhauer believed, but merely becomes 
transfigured, and ceases to enter into the conscious- 
ness as sexual excitement. (I shall return once 
again to this point in connection with the more 
delicate problems of the physiology of the cBsthetic, a 
subject which up to the present has been singularly 
untouched and unelucidated.) 



9- 

A certain asceticism, a grimly gay whole-hearted 
renunciation, is, as we have seen, one of the most 
favourable conditions for the highest intellectualism, 
and, consequently, for the most natural corollaries 
of such intellectualism : we shall therefore be proof 
against any surprise at the philosophers in par- 
ticular always treating the ascetic ideal with a 
certain amount of predilection. A serious historical 
investigation shows the bond between tBe ascetic - 
ideal and philosophy to be stiirmuch tighter and 
still much stronger. It may be said that it was" 
only in the leading strings of this ideal that philo- 
sophy really learnt to make its first steps and baby 
paces — alas how clumsily, alas how crossly, alas 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 143 

how ready to tumble down and lie on its stomach 
was this shy little darling of a brat with its bandy 
legs ! The early^history of^^hilosophy isjikejhat 
of all goo3 things ; — for a long time they had not 
the c6UfagS"tO "be themselves, they kept always 
toalring roufid loTsee if no one would come to their 
help7"fiarther, they were afraid of all who looked 
at~'tliem. Just enumerate in order the particular 
tendencies and virtues of the philosopher — his 
tendency to doubt, his tendency to deny, his 
tendency to wait (to be " ephectic " ), his tendency 
to analyse, search, explore, dare, his tendency to 
c'ompare and to equalise, his will to be neutral and 
objective, his will for everything which is " sine ira 
et'studio " : — has it yet been realised that for quite 
a lengthy period these tendencies went counter 
to the first claims of morality and conscience ? 
(Tor~say nothing at all of Reason, which even 
Luther chose to call Frau Kliiglin* the sly 
whore^ Has it been yet appreciated that a 
philosopher, in the event of his arriving at self- 
consciousness, must needs feel himself an incarnate 
" nitimur in vetitum" — and consequently guard 
himself against " his own sensations," against self- 
consciousness ? It is, I repeat, just the same with 
all good things, on which we now pride ourselves ; 
even judged by the standard of the ancient Greeks, 
our whole modern life, in so far as it is not weak- 
ness, but power and the consciousness of power, 
appears pure " Hybris " and godlessness : for the 
things which are the very reverse of those which 

* Mistress Sly.— Tr. 



144 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

we honour to-day, have had for a long time 
conscience on their side, and God as their 
guardian. " Hybris " is our whole attitude to nature 
nowadays, our violation ol nature wit h the help of 
machinery, and all the unscrupulo us ing enuity nf 

_^mg::gcregistrand '^^^^^^ 
attitude to Godj_thatJs, t o some alleged teleological 
and ethical spider behind th.e„.pigsli es of the great 
trap ofthejcausal_webJ Like Charles the Bold 

"in his war with Louis the Eleventh, we may say, 
"je combats runiverselle araignie " ; " Hybris " is our 
attitude tP JoursebjeaTr-for we experimeat'witliai}X:_ 
selvesin a way that we would not allow with any 
animal, and with pleasure and curiosity open o ur 
soul in our living body : what matters now to us 
the " salvation " of the "soul ? We heal ourselves 
afterwards : being ill is instructive, we doubt it 
not, even more instructive than being well — 
inoculators of disease seem to us to-day even more 
necessary than any medicine-men and " saviours." 
There is no doubt we do violence to ourselves 

"nowadays, we crackers "xrf ' the SDlifs'^WlTCtrwe 
incarnate riddles, who are ever asking riddles, as 
though life were naught else than the cracking of a 
nut ; and even thereby must we necessarily become 
day by day more and more worthy to be asked 
questions and worthy to ask them, even thereby 
do we perchance also become worthier to — live? 

jp^ . . . All good things were once bad, things ; 
from every original sin .has..growii,„aiL,OTigiaal 
virtuej Marriage, for example, seemed for a long 
time a sin against the rights of the community; 
a man formerly paid a fine for the insolence of 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? , 14S ' 

claiming one woman to himself (to this phase 
belongs, for instance, the jus primes noctis, to-day 
still in Cambodia the privilege of the priest, that 
guardian of the " good old customs "). 

rr he softr benevolent, yieldi ng, sympathetic feel- 
ings — eventually valued sohigHlyTESTl^^^Kost" 
became " mtrinsjc_j[alues,""wCTe~for a very^long 
time actually despised by their possessors : gentle- 
hess wa's then"a"subject for shame, just as hardness 
is~now (compare Beyond Good and Evzl^ Aph. 
266). t iT ie submission to law, o h, with what 
qualms of conscience was it that the noble races 
throughout the world renounced the vendetta and 
gave the law power over themselves ! Law was 
long a vetitum, a blasphemy, an innovation ; it was 
ilitrtfditced~wtth-force,~/»^i? a- force, to which men 
only submitted witK'a 'sense "Of personaT shame. 
Every tiny step forward in tlie world was formerly 
made at the cost of mental and physical torEure. 
Nowa3ays the wKole of this point of view—" that 
not only stepping forward, nay, stepping at~all7~ 
movement, change, air~~needed 'their cou'ritTfess 
martyrs,"^ rings in our ears quite stirangely. 
I have put it forward in the Dawn of Day, 
Aph. 1 8. " Nothing is purchased more dearly," 
says the same book a little later, " than the 
modicum of human reason and freedom which is 
now our pride. JButJthat^ pride is the reason why 
it is now almost impossible for us to"TeeI~ln 
sympathywitH" those 'immense periods of "the " 
' Morality of Custom,' which lie at the beginning" 
of' the 'world's history,' constituting as they do 
the real decisive historical principle which has 



146 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

fixed the character of humanity ; those periods, 
I repeat, when throughout' the world suffering 
passed for virtuTeT^crueTty'loF virtue, deceit for" 
■virtue, revenge for virtue, repudiatioh'orthe^rM,sprr 
for virtue ; and when, conversely, well-being passed 
current for danger, the desire for knowledge for 
danger, pity for danger, peace for danger, being 
pitied for shame, work for shame, madness for 
divinity, and change for immorality and incarnate 
corruption ! " 

10. 

There is in the same book, Aph. 1 2, an explana- 
tion of the burden of unpopularity under which 
the earliest race of contemplative men had to live 
— despised almost as widely as they were first 
feared 1 Contemplation first appeared on earth 
in a disguised shape, in an ambiguous form, with 
an evil heart and often with an uneasy head : there 
is no doubt about it. The inactive, brooding, un- 
warlike element in the instincts of contemplative 
men long invested them with a cloud of suspicion : 
the only way to combat this was to excite a definite 
fear. And the old Brahmans, for example, knew 
to a nicety how to do this ! The oldest philo- 
sophers were well versed in giving to their very 
existence and appearance, meaning, firmness, back- 
ground, by reason whereof men learnt to fear 
them ; considered more precisely, they did this 
from an even more fundamental need, the need of 
inspiring in themselves fear and self-reverence. 
For they found even in their own souls all the 
valuations turned against themselves ; they had to 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 147 

fight down every kind of suspicion and antagonism 
against " the philosophic element in themselves." 
Being men of a terrible age, they did this with 
terrible means: cruelty to themselves, ingenious 
self-mortification — this was the chief method of 
these ambitious hermits and intellectual revolution- 
aries, who were obliged to force down the gods 
and the traditions of their own soul, so as to enable 
themselves to believe in their own revolution. I 
remember the famous story of the King Vicvamitra, 
who, as the result of a thousand years of self- 
martyrdom, reached such a consciousness of power 
and such a confidence in himself that he undertook 
to build a new heaven : the sinister symbol of the 
oldest and newest history of philosophy in the 
whole world. Every one who has ever built any^ 
where a " new heaven " first found the power thereto 
in his own hell. \. . . Let us compress the facts 
into a short formula. The philosophic spirit had, 
in order to be possible to any extent at all, to 
masquerade and disguise itself as one of the 
previously fixed types of the contemplative man, 
to disguise itself as priest, wizard, soothsayer, as a 
religious man generally : the ascetic ideal has for a 
~Iorig~ttme served the^ phil,os,ppher_as a superficial 
"formTas a condition which enabled him to exist. 
T". . To be able to be a philosopher he had to 
exemplify the ideaTjJo exemplify it, lie. waa/Bound 
io Jielieve~ va. it. The peculiarly etherealised 
abstraction of philosophers, with their negation of 
the world, their enmity to life, their disbelief in the 
senses, which has been maintained up to the most 
recent time, and has almost thereby come to be 



148 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

accepted as the ideal philosophic attitude — this 
abstraction is the result of those enforced conditions 
under which philosophy came into existence, and 
continued to exist ; inasmuch as for quite a very 
long time philosophy would have been absolutely 
impossible in the world without an ascetic cloak 
and dress, without an ascetic self-misunderstanding. 
Expressed plainly and palpably, the ascetic priest 
has taken the repulsive and sinister form of the 
caterpillar, beneath which and behind which alone 
philosophy could live and slink about. . . . 

Has all that really changed ? Has that 
flamboyant and dangerous winged creature, that 
" spirit " which that caterpillar concealed within 
itself, has it, I say, thanks to a sunnier, warmer, 
lighter world, really and finally flung off its hood 
and escaped into the light ? Can we to-day point 
to enough pride, enough daring, enough courage, 
enough self-confidence, enough mental will, enough 
will for responsibility, enough freedom of the will, 
to enable the philosopher to be now in the world 
really — possible ? 

II. 

And now, after we have caught sight of the 
ascetic priest, let us tackle our problem. What is 
the meaning of the ascetic ideal ? It now first 
becomes serious — vitally serious. We are now 
confronted with the real representatives of the 
serious. " What is the meaning of all seriousness ?," 
This even more radical question is perchance 
already on the tip of our tongue: a question, 
fairly, for physiologists, but which we for the time 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? I49 

being skip. In that ideal the ascetic priest finds 
not only his faith.'^ut "alSo his will, his "p bwSr^ Ms 
interestr His HgM to existence stands and falls 



with that ideaT '"'What wonder that we here run 
lip against a terrible opponent (on the supposition, 
of course, that we are the opponents of that ideal), 
an opponent fighting for his life against those who 
repudiate that ideal ! ... On the other hand, it 
is from the outset improbable that such a biased 
attitude towards our problem will do him any 
particular good ; the ascetic priest himself will 
scarcely prove the happiest champion of his own 
ideal (on the same principle on which a woman 
usually fails when she wishes to champion 
" woman ") — let alone proving the most object- 
ive critic and judge of the controversy now raised. 
We shall therefore — so much is already obvious — 
rather have actually to help him to defend himself 
properly against ourselves, than we shall have to 
fear being too well beaten by him. The idea, 
which is the subject of this dispute, is the value 
of our life from the standpoint of the ascetic 
priests : this life, then (together with the whole of 
which it is a part, " Nature," " the world," the 
whole sphere of becoming and passing away), is 
placed by them in relation to an existence of 
quite another character, which it excludes and to 
which it is opposed, unless it deny its own self: 
ip this case, the case of an ascetic life, life is taken 
as a bridge to another existence. The ascetic 
treats life as a maze, in which one must walk 
backwards till one comes to the place where it 
starts ; or he treats it as arj. error which. 'oQ.e may, 



ISO THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

nay must, refute by action : for he demands that 
he should be followed ; he enforces, where hecan, 
his valuation of existence. What does this mean ? 
Such a monstrous valuation is not an exceptional 
case, or a curiosity recorded in human history:' It 
is one of the most general and persistent facts thaf 
there are'." The rea3ing from the vantage ^f^a—- 
distant sFar of the capital letters of our earthly 
life, would perchance lead to the conclusion that 
/the earth was the especially ascetic planet, a den 
of discontented, arrogant, and repulsive creatures, 
who never got rid of a deep disgust of themselves, 
of the world, of all life, and did themselves as 
much hurt as possible out of pleasure in hurt- 
ing — presumably their one and only pleasure! 
Let us consider how regularly, how universally; 
how practically at every single period the ascetic 
priest puts in his appearance : he belongs to" no 
particular race ; he thrives everywhere ; he grows 
out of all classes. Not that he perhaps bred this 
valuation by heredity and propagated it — the 
contrary is the case. It must be a necessity of 
the first order which makes this species, hostile, as 
it is, to life, always grow again and always thrive 
again. — LtfejS^cSi must certainly have an interest in 
the continuance ofsuch alype of s^lfr^ntradifiltorn— 
~F6r_3a_asj:etic life^ is a self-contradiction: here 
rules resentment without parallel, the resentmenT" 
of an insatiate instinct and ambition, thai would 
be master, not over some element in life, but over 
life itself, over life's deepest, strongest, inioermost 
conditions ; here is an attempt made to utilise 
power to dam the sources of power; here does 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? I SI 

the green eye of jealousy turn even against physio- 
logical well-being, especially against the expres- 
sion of such well-being, beauty, joy ; while a sense 
of pleasure is experienced and sought in abortion, 
in decay, in pain, in misfortune, in ugliness, in 
voluntary punishment, in the exercising, flagella- 
tion, and sacrifice of the self. All this is in the 
highest degree paradoxical : we are here con- 
fronted with a rift that wills itself to be a rift, 
which enjoys itself in this very suffering, and even 
Ibecomes more and more certain of itself, more and 
more triumphant, in proportion as its, ..Qjfo , pre- 
supposition, physiological vitality, decreases. " The 
triumph just in the supreme agony " : under this 
extravagant emblem did the ascetic ideal fight 
from of old ; in this mystery of seduction, in this 
picture of rapture and torture, it recognised its 
brightest light, its salvation, its final victory. 
Crux, nux, lux — it has all these three in one. 



12. 

Granted that such an incarnate will for contra- 
diction and unnaturalness is induced to philosophise ; 
on what will it vent its pet caprice? On that 
which has been felt with the greatest certainty to 
be true, to be real ; it will look for error in those 
very places where the life instinct fixes truth with 
the greatest positiveness. It will, for instance, 
after the example of the ascetics of the Vedanta 
Philosophy, re duce matter to an illusion, and 
similarly; treat pain, multiplicity, the whole logical 
"contrast of^5«?^?r'arid''' Olject" — errors, msthing- 



152 ■ THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

but errors ! To renounce the belief in one's own 
ego, to deny to one's self one's^own ''^reality "^^^ 
what a triumph ! and Here "already we haveXmilCh 
higher kind of triumph, which is not merely a 
triumph over the senses, over the palpable, mJE~afr~ 
infliction of violence and cruelty on reason ;'~an& 
this ecstasy culminates in the ascetic self-contempt, 
the ascetic scorn of one's own "reason making this 
decree : there is a domain of truth and of ^ife,, but" 
reason is specially excluded therefrom. ... By 
the bye, even in the Kantian idea of " the intel- 
legible character of things " there remains a trace 
of that schism, so dear to the heart of the ascetic, 
that schism which likes to turn reason against 
reason ; in fact, " intelligible character " means in 
Kant a kind of quality in things of which the 
intellect comprehends this much, that for it, the 
intellect, it is absolutely incomprehensible. After 
all, let us, in our character of knowers, not be 
ungrateful towards such determined reversals of 
the ordinary perspectives and values, with which 
the mind had for too long raged against itself 
with an apparently futile sacrilege ! In the same 
way the very seeing of another vista, the"vBry-^ 
wishing to see another vista, is no little training 
and preparation of the intellect for its eternal 
" Objectivity " — objectivity being understood not 
as " contemplation without interest " (for that is 
inconceivable and nonsensical), but as the ability 
to have the pros and cons in one's fpwer a.ndJio 
switch them on and oif, so- as to get, to knovv_how 
to utilise, for the advancement of knowledge, the " 
difference in the perspective and in the emolional 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 153 

inte rpretati ons.,^ But let us, forsooth, my philo- 
sophic colleagues, henceforward guard ourselves 
more carefully against this mythology of danger- 
ous ancient ideas, which has set up a " pure, will- 
less, painless, timeless subject of knowledge " ; let 
us guard ourselves from the tentacles of such 
contradictory ideas as "' pure reason," "absolute 
spirituality,""" knowledge - in - itself" : — in these 
theorres^" an "eye that cannot be thought of is 
required to think, an eye which ex hypothesi has 
no direction at all, an eye in which the active and 
interpreting functions are cramped, are absent ; 
those functions, I say, by means of which " abstract" 
seeing first became seeing something ; in these 
theories consequently the absurd and the nonsen- 
sical is always demanded of the eye. There is 
only a seeing from a perspective, only a " know- 
ing '' from a perspective, and the more emotions 
we express over a thing, the more eyes, different 
eyes, we train on the same thing, the more com- 
plete will be our " idea " of that thing, our " objec- 
tivity." But the elimination of the will altogether, 
the switching off of the emotions all and sundry, 
granted that we could do so, what ! would not 
that be called intellectual castration ? 



13- 

But let us turn back. Such a self-contradic- 
tion, as apparently manifests itself among the 
ascetics, " Life turned against Life," is — this much 
is absolutely obvious — from the physiological and 
not now from the psychological standpoint, simply 



154 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

nonsense. It can only be an apparent cont f ^- 
diction ; it must be a kind of provisional ex- 
pression, an explanation, a formula, an adjustment, 
a psychological misunderstanding of something, 
whose real nature could not be understQQd_i2Li_ 
long time, and whose real essence covXd. not be 
described; a mere word jamnied into— aaI3l5]" 
gap of human knowledge. To put briefly the 
facts against its being real : the ascetic ideal springs 
from the prophylactic and self -preservative instincts 
which mark^^decadent life, which seeks by, every^ 
means in its power to maintain its position and 
>fight for its existence; it points to "a partiat' 
physiological depression and exhaustion, against 
which the most profound and intact life-instincts 
fight ceaselessly with new weapons and dis- 
coveries. The ascetic ideal is such a weapon : 
its position is consequentlv_^xact! y the re verse 
of that which the worshippers of the ideal 
imagine — life struggles in it and through ~tt~WTth- 
death and against death ; the ascetic"" ideal 
is a dodge for the preservation of life. An 
important fact is brought out in the extent to 
which, as history teaches, this ideal, coijld^rule 
and exercise power over man, especially in al! 
those places where the civilisation and taming 
of man was completed : that fact is, the diseased 
state of man up to the present, at any rate, of 
the man who has been tamed, the physiological 
struggle of man with death (more precisely, with 
the disgust with life, with exhaustion, with the 
wish for the " end "). The ascetic priest is the 
incarnate wish for an existence of another kind. 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? I 55 

an existence on another plane, — he is, in fact, the 
highest point of this wish, its official ecstasy and 
passion : but it is the vety power of this wish 
which is the fetter that binds him here ; it is 
just that which makes him into a tool that must 
labour to create more favourable conditions for 
earthly existence, for existence on the human 
plane — it is with this very power that he keeps 
the whole" herd of failures, distortions, abortions, 
unfortunates, sufferers from tlietnselves of every 
kind, fast to existence, while he as the herdsnian 
goes instinctively on in front. You understand 
me already : this ascetic priest, this apparent 
enemy of life, ^ thi5 jjenier-r^he . actually belongs, 
to the really great conservative and affirmative 
forces of life. . . | What does it come from, this 
diseased state? For man is more diseased, more 
uncertain, more changeable, more unstable than 
any other animal, there is no doubt of it — he is 
the diseased animal : what does it spring from ? 
Certainly he has also dared, innovated, braved 
more, challenged fate more than all the other 
animals put together ; he, the great experimenter 
with himself, the unsatisfied, the insatiate, who 
struggles for the supreme mastery with beast, 
Nature, and gods, he, the as yet ever uncompelled, 
the ever future, who finds no more any rest from 
his own aggressive strength, goaded inexorably 
on by the spur of the future dug into the flesh 
of the present : — how should not so brave and 
rich an animal also be the most endangered, 
the animal with the longest and deepest sickness 
among all sick animals ? . . . Man is sick of it, oft 



156 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

enough there are whole epidemics of this satiety 
(as about i 348, the time of the Dance of Death) : 
but even this very nausea, this tiredness, this 
disgust with himself, all this is discharged from 
him with such force that it is immediately made 
into a new fetter. His " nay," which he utters 
to life, brings to light as though by magic an 
abundance of graceful " yeas " ; even when he 
wounds himself, this master of destruction, of self- 
destruction, it is subsequently the wound itself 
that forces him to live. 



14. 

The more normal is this sickliness in man — 
and we cannot dispute this normality— the higher 
honour should be paid to the rare cases of 
psychical and physical powerfulness, the wind- 
falls of humanity, and the more strictly should 
the sound be guarded from that worst of air, the 
air of the sick-room. Is that done? \The sick 
are the greatest danger for the healthy ; it is not 
from the strongest that harm comes to the strong, 
but from the weakest. I Is that known ? Broadly 
considered, it is not for a minute the fear of man, 
whose diminution should be wished for ; for this 
fear forces the strong to be strong, to be at times 
terrible — it preserves in its integrity the sound 
type of man. ( What is to be feared, what does 
work with a fatality found in no other fate, is not 
the great fear of, but the great nausea with, man ; 
and equally so the great pity for man^ Sup- 
posing that both these things were one day to 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 157 

espouse each other, then inevitably the maximum 
of monstrousness would immediately come into 
the world — the " last will " of man, his will for 
nothingness, Nihilism, ^d. in sooth, the way 
is well paved thereto. iHe who not only has 
his nose to smell with, but also has eyes and 
ears, he sniffs almost wherever he goes to-day 
an air something like that of a mad-house, 
the air of a hospital — 1 am speaking, as stands 
to reason, of the cultured areas of mankind, of 
every kind of " Europe" that there is in fact in 
the world. | [The sick are the great danger of 
man, not the evil, not the " beasts of prey."^ They 
who are from the outset botched, oppressed, 
broken, those are they, the weakest are they, who 
most undermine the life beneath the feet of 
man, who instil the most dangerous venom and 
scepticism into our trust in life, in man, in our- 
selvejjj Where shall we escape from it, from that 
covert look (from which we carry away a deep 
sadness), from that averted look of him who is 
misborn from the beginning, that look which 
betrays what such a man says to himself — that 
look which is a groan ? " Would that I were 
something else," so groans this look, "but there 
is no hope. \1 am what I am : how could I ge^ 
away from myself? And, verily — / am sick of, 
myself!" On such a soil of self-contempt, aj 
veritable swamp soil, grows that weed, that 
poisonous growth, and all so tiny, so hidden, so, 
ignoble, so sugary; ]] Here teem the worms of 
revenge and vindictiveness ; here the air reeks 
of things secret and unmentionable ; here is ever 



IS8 , THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

spun the net of the most malignant conspiracy 
— the conspiracy of the sufferers against the sound 
and the victorious; here is the sight of the 
victorious hated. J And what lying so as not to 
acknowledge this hate as hate ! What a show 
of big words and attitudes, what an art of 
" righteous " calumniation ! These abortions ! 
what a noble eloquence gushes from their lips! 
Pwhat an amount of sugary, slimy, humble sub- 
mission oozes in their eyes ! What do they 
really want ? At any rate to represent righteous- 
ness, love, wisdom, superiority, that is the 
ambition of these " lowest ones," these sick gnesjj 
And how clever does such an arnbition make 
them! You cannot, in fact, but admire the 
counterfeiter dexterity with which the stamp of 
virtue, even the ring, the golden ring of virtue, 
is here imitated. They have taken a lease of 
virtue absolutely for themselves, have these 
weaklings and wretched invalids, there is no 
doubt of it ; " We alone are the good, the righteous^^ 
so do they speak^' we alone are the homines 
bona voluntatis'.' pThey stalk about in our midst 
as living reproaches, as warnings to us — as 
though health, fitness, strength, pride, the sensa- 
tion of power, were really vicious things in them- 
selves, for which one would have some day to do 
penance, bitter penance. Oh, how they themselves 
are ready in their hearts to exact penance, how 
they thirst after being hangmen I j 

I Among them is an abundance of revengeful 
ones disguised as judges, who ever mouth the 
word righteousness like a venomous spittle — with 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 1 59 

mouth, I say, always pursed, always ready to spit 
at everything, which does not wear a discontented 
look, but is of good cheer as it goes on its wa y. \ 
Among them, again, is that most loathsome species 
of the vain, the lying abortions, who make a point 
of representing " beautiful souls," and perchance 
of bringing to the market as " purity of heart " 
their distorted sensualism swathed in verses and - 
other bandages ; the species of " self-comforters " 
and masturbators of their own souls. iThe sick - 
man's will to represent some form or other of 
s uperiority, h i s i tia tit ieiribr crooked-paths-whiich 
lead to a' tj^anny over the healthy— wEere^ari it 
not be found, thfs' will to_j)qwer of Xlie_very 
weakest ? I The sick woman especially : no one 
"SBrpassSSTier in refinements for ruling, oppressing, 
tyrannising. The sick woman, moreover, spares 
nothing living, nothing dead ; she grubs up again 
the most buried things (the Bogos say, " Woman 
is a hyena "). Look into the background of every 
family, of every body, of every community : every- 
where the fight of the sick against the healthy — 
a silent fight for the most part with minute poisoned 
powfiers, with pin-pricks, with spiteful grimaces of 
patience, but also at times with that diseased 
Pharisaism of pure pantomime, which plays for 
choice the r61e of " righteous indignation." Right 
into the hallowed chambers of knowledge can it 
make itself heard, can this hoarse yelping of sick 
hounds, this rabid lying and frenzy of such " noble " 
Pharisees (I remind readers, who have ears, once 
more of that Berlin apostle of revenge, Eugen 
Duhring, who makes the most disreputable and 



l6o THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

revolting use in all present-day Germany of moral 
refuse ; DUhring, the paramount moral blusterer 
that there is to-day, even among his own kidney, 
the Anti-Semites). TThey are all men of , resent- 
ment, are these physiological distortions and 
worm-riddled objects, a whole quiverinig kingd^^ 
of burrowing revenge, indefatigable and insatiable" 
in its outbursts against the happy, and equallj^sq 
in disguises for revenge, in pretexts for revenge^ 
when will they really reach their final, fondest, 
most sublime triumph of revenge ? \ At that time, 
doubtless, when they succeed in pushing their own 
misery, in fact, all misery, inio the consciousmss pi 
the happy ; so that the latter begin one day to be 
ashamed of their happiness, and perchance say to 
themselves when they meet, " It is a shame to be 
happy ! there is too much misery .'"... But there 
could not possibly be a greater and more fatal 
misunderstanding than that of the happy, the fit, 
the strong in body and soul, beginning in this way 
to doubt their right to happiness. Away with 
this " perverse world " ! Away with this shameful 
soddenness of sentiment ! Preventing the sick 
making the healthy sick — for that is what such a 
soddenness comes to — this ought to be our supreme 
object in the world — but for this it is above all 
essential that the healthy should remain separated 
from the sick, that they should even guard them- 
selves from the look of the sick, that they should 
not even associate with the sick. Or may it, 
perchance, be their mission to be nurses or doctors ? 
But they could not mistake and disown their 
mission more grossly-|-the higher must not 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? l6l 

degrade itself to be the tool of the lower, the 
pathos of distance must to all eternity keep 
their missions also separateJ The right of the 
happy to existence, the right of bells with a full 
tone over the discordant cracked bells, is verily 
a thousand times greater : they alone are the 
sureties of the future, they alone are bound to 
man's future. What they can, what they must do, 
that can the sick never do, should never do ! but 
if they are to be enabled to do what only they must 
do, how can they possibly be free to play the doctor, 
the comforter, the " Saviour " of the sick ? . . . And 
therefore good air ! good air ! and away, at any 
rate, from the neighbourhood of all the madhouses 
and hospitals of civilisation ! And therefore good 
company, our own company, or solitude, if it must 
be so ! but away, at any rate, from the evil fumes 
of internal corruption and the secret worm-eat|n 
state of the sick ! that, forsooth, my friends,(we 
may defend ourselves, at any rate for still a time, 
against the two worst plagues that could have 
been reserved for us — against the great nausea 
with man ! against the great pity for man ! \ 



IS- 

If you have understood in all their depths — and 
I demand that you should grasp them profoundly 
and understand them profoundly — the reasons for 
the impossibility of its being the business of the 
healthy to nurse the sick, to make the sick healthy, 
it follows that you have grasped this further 
necessity — the necessity of doctors and nurses 
L 



1 62 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

who themselves are sick. And now we have and 
hold with both our hands the essence of the 
ascetic priest. The ascetic priest must be accepted 
by us as the predestined saviour, herdsman, and 
champion of the sick herd: thereby do we first 
understand his awful historic mission. The lord- 
ship over sufferers is his kingdom, to that points 
his instinct, in that he finds his own special art, 
his master-skill, his kind of happiness. He must 
himself be sick, he must be kith and kin to the 
sick and the abortions so as to understand them, 
so as to arrive at an understanding with them ; 
but he must also be strong, even more master of 
himself than of others, impregnable, forsooth, in his 
will for power, so as to acquire the trust and the 
awe of the weak, so that he can be their hold, 
bulwark, prop, compulsion, overseer, tyrant, god. 
He has to protect them, protect his hsxAs— against 
whom ? Against the healthy, doubtless also 
against the envy towards the healthy. He must 
be the natural adversary and scorner of every rough, 
stormy, reinless, hard, violently-predatory health 
and power. The priest is the first form of the 
more delicate animal that scorns more easily than 
it hates. He will not be spared the waging of war 
with the beasts of prey, a war of guile (of " spirit ") 
rather than of force, as is self-evident — he will in 
certain cases find it necessary to conjure up out of 
himself, or at any rate to represent practically a 
new type of the beast of prey — a new animal 
monstrosity in which the polar bear, the supple, 
cold, crouching panther, and, not least important, 
the fox, are joined together in a trinity as fascinating 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 163 

as it is fearsome. If necessity exacts it, then will 
he come on the scene with bearish seriousness, 
venerable, wise, cold, full of treacherous superiority, 
as the herald and mouthpiece of mysterious powers, 
sometimes going among even the other kind of 
beasts of prey, determined as he is to sow on their 
soil, wherever he can, suffering, discord, self-contra- 
diction, and only too sure of his art, always to be 
lord of sufferers at all times. He brings with him, 
doubtless, salve and balsam ; but before he can 
play the physician he must first wound ; so, while 
he soothes the pain which the wound makes, he at 
the same time poisons the wound. (Well versed is 
he in this above all things, is this wizard and wild 
beast tamer, in whose vicinity everything healthy 
must needs become ill, and everything ill must 
needs become tam^ He protects, in sooth, his 
sick herd well enough, does this strange herdsman ; 
he protects them also against themselves, against 
the sparks (even in the centre of the herd) of 
wickedness, knavery, malice, and all the other ills 
that the plaguey and the sick are heir to ; he fights 
with cunning, hardness, and stealth against anarchy 
and against the ever imminent break-up inside 
the herd, where resentment, that most dangerous 
brastihg-stuff and explosive, ever accumulates and 
accumulates. Getting rid of this blasting-stuff in 
such a way that it does not blow up the herd and 
the herdsman, that is his real feat, his supreme 
utility ; if, you ^wish to comprise in the sh ortest 
formula the value of the priestl;>Mife, it would be 
correct to say the priest Tslhie diverter of the course 
of resentment. Every sufferer," in fa'cf,' searches 



l64 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

instinctively for a cause of his suffering ; to put it 
more exactly, a doer, — to put it still more precisely, 
a sentient responsible dber, — in brief, something 
living, on which, either actually or in effigie, he can 
on any pretext vent his emotions. For the venting 
of emotions is the sufferer's greatest attempt at 
alleviation, that is to say, stupefaction, his mechanic- 
ally desired narcotic against pain of any kind. 
It is in this phenomenon alone that is found, 
according to my judgment, the real physiological 
cause of resentment, revenge, and their family is to 
be found— ;-that is, in a . demand for i!&s.-deadmiag__ 
of pain through emotion : this cause is generally, but 
in my view very erroneously, looked for in the 
defensive parry of a bare protective principle of 
reaction, of a " reflex movement " in the case of 
any sudden hurt and danger, after the manner 
that a decapitated frog still moves in order to get 
away from a corrosive acid. But the difference 
is fundamental. In one case the object is to 
prevent being hurt any more ; in the other case 
the object is to deaden a racking, insidious, nearly 
unbearable pain by a more violent emotion of 
any kind whatsoever, and at any rate for the time 
being to drive it out of the consciousness — for 
this purpose an emotion is needed, as wild 
an emotion as possible, and to excite that 
emotion some excuse or other is needed. " It 
must be somebody's fault that I feel bad" — this 
kind of reasoning is peculiar to all invalids, and 
is but the more pronounced, the more ignorant 
they remain of the real cause of their feeling bad, 
the physiological cause (the cause may lie in a 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? l6S 

disease of the nervus sympathicus, or in an ex- 
cessive secretion of bile, or in a want of sulphate 
and phosphate of potash in the blood, or in pressure 
in the bowels which stops the circulation of the 
blood, or in degeneration of the ovaries, and so 
forth). Ail sufferers have an awful resourcefulness 
and ingenuity in finding excuses for painful 
emotions ; they even enjoy their jealousy, their 
broodings over base actions and apparent injuries, 
they burrow through the intestines of their past 
and present in their search for obscure mysteries, 
wherein they will be at liberty to wallow in a 
torturing suspicion and get drunk on the venom 
of their own malice — they tear open the oldest 
wounds, they make themselves bleed from the 
scars which have long been healed, they make 
evil-doers out of friends, wife, child, and every- 
thing which is nearest to them. " I suffer : it 
must be somebody's fault" — so thinks every sick 
'sheep. But his herdsman, the ascetic priest, says 
to him, " Quite so, my sheep, it must be the 
fault of some one ; but thou thyself art that some 
one, it is all the fault of thyself alone — it is the 
foMtt of thyself alone against thyself" : that is. bold 
enough, false enough, but one thing is at least 
attained ; thereby, as I have said, the course of 
resentment is — diverted. 



1 6. 

You can see now what the remedial instinct of 
life has at least tried to effect, according to my 
conception, through the ascetic priest, and the 



1 66 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

purpose for which he had to employ a temporary 
, tyranny of such paradoxical and anomalous ideas 
as " guilt," " sin," " sinfulness," " corruption," 
I " damnation." What was done was to make the 
; sick harmless up to a certain point, to destroy the 
'.incurable by means of themselves, to turn the 
'•milder cases severely on to themselves, to give 
t their resentment a backward direction ("man 
needs but one thing"), and to exploit similarly 
the bad instincts of all sufferers with a view to 
self-discipline, self-surveillance, self-mastery. It is 
obvious that there can be no question at all in 
the case of a " medication " of this kind, a mere 
emotional medication, of any real healing of the 
sick in the physiological sense ; it cannot even 
for a moment be asserted that in this connection 
the instinct of life has taken healing as its goal 
and purpose. tOn the one hand, a kind of con- 
gestion and organisation of the sick (the word 
" Church" is the most popular name for it)jj on the 
other, a kind of provisional safeguarding of the 
comparatively healthy, the more perfect specimens, 
the cleavage of a rift between healthy and sick — 
for a long time that was all ! and it was much ! it 
was very much ! 

I am proceeding, as you see, in this essay, 
from an hypothesis which, as far as such readers 
as I want are concerned, does not require to be 
proved ; the hypothesis that " sinfulness " in man 
is not an actual fact, but rather merely the inter- 
pretation of a fact, of a physiological discomfort, 
— a discomfort seen through a moral religious 
perspective which is no longer binding upon us. 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 167 

The fact, therefore, that any one feels " guilty," 
" sinful," is certainly not yet any proof that he 
is right in feeling so, any more than any one is 
healthy simply because he feels healthy Re- 
member the celebrated witch-ordeals : in those 
days the most acute and humane judges had no 
doubt but that in these cases they were confronted 
with guilt, — the " witches " themselves had no doubt 
on the point, — and yet the guilt was lacking. Let 
me elaborate this hypothesis : I do not for a 
minute accept the very " pain in the soul " as a 
real fact, but only as an explanation (a casual 
explanation) of facts that could not hitherto be 
precisely formulated; I regard it therefore as 
something as yet absolutely in the air and devoid 
of scientific cogency — ^just a nice fat word in the 
place of a lean note of interrogation. When any 
one fails to get rid of his " pain in the soul," the 
cause is, speaking crudely, to be found not in his 
" soul " but more probably in his stomach (speaking 
crudely, I repeat, but by no means wishing there- 
by that you should listen to me or understand me 
in a crude spirit). A strong and well-constituted 
man digests his experiences (deeds and misdeeds 
all included) just as he digests his meats, even 
when he has some tough morsels to swallow. If 
he fails to " relieve himself" of an experience, 
this kind of indigestion is quite as much physio- 
logical as the other indigestion — and indeed, in 
more ways than one, simply one of the results of 
the other. You can adopt such a theory, and yet 
entre nous be nevertheless the strongest opponent 
of all materialism. 



1 68 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

17. 

But is he really 2. physician, this ascetic priest? 
We already understand why we are scarcely 
allowed to call him a physician, however much 
he likes to feel a " saviour " and let himself be 
worshipped as a saviour.* It is only the actual 
suffering, the discomfort of the sufferer, which he 
combats, not its cause, not the actual state of sick- 
ness — this needs must constitute our most radical 
objection to priestly medication. But just once 
put yourself into that point of view, of which the 
priests have a monopoly, you will find it hard to 
exhaust your amazement, at what from that stand- 
point he has completely seen, sought, and found. 
The mitigation of suffering, every kind of " con- 
soling '' — all this manifests itself as his very genius : 
with what ingenuity has he interpreted his mission 
of consoler, with what aplomb and audacity has 
he chosen weapons necessary for the part. Christi- 
anity in particular should be dubbed a great 
treasure-chamber of ingenious consolations, — such 
a store of refreshing, soothing, deadening drugs 
has it accumulated within itself; so many of the 
most dangerous and daring expedients has it 
hazarded ; with such subtlety, refinement, Oriental 
refinement, has it divined what emotional stimu- 
lants can conquer, at any rate for a time, the deep 
depression, the leaden fatigue, the black melan- 
choly of physiological cripples — for, speaking 

* In the German text " Heiland." This has the double 
meaning of " healer " and " saviour." — H. B. S. 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 69 

generally, all religions are mainly concerned with 
fighting a certain fatigue and heaviness that has 
infected everything. You can regard it as prima 
facie probable that in certain places in the world 
there was almost bound to prevail from time to 
time among large masses of the population a 
sense of physiological depression, which, however, 
owing to their lack of physiological knowledge, 
did not appear to their consciousness as such, 
so that consequently its " cause " and its cure 
can only be sought and essayed in the science 
of moral psychology (this, in fact, is my most 
general formula for what is generally called a 
"religion"^ Such a feeling of depression can 
have the most diverse origins ; it may be the 
result of the crossing of too heterogeneous races 
(or of classes — genealogical and racial differences 
are also brought out in the classes : the European 
" Weltschmerz," the " Pessimism " of the nineteenth 
century, is really the result of an absurd and 
sudden class-mixture) ; it may be brought about 
by a mistaken emigration — a race falling into 
a climate for which its power of adaptation is 
insufficient (the case of the Indians in India) ; it 
may be the effect of old age and fatigue (the 
Parisian pessimism from 1850 onwards); it may 
be a wrong diet (the alcoholism of the Middle 
Ages, the nonsense of vegetarianism — which, 
however, have in their favour the authority of Sir 
Christopher in Shakespeare) ; it may be blood- 
deterioration, malaria, syphilis, and the like 
(German depression after the Thirty Years' War, 
which infected half Germany with evil diseases, 



I70 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

and thereby paved the way for German servility, 
for German pusillanimity). In such a case there 
is invariably recourse to a war on a grand scale 
with the feeling of depression ; let us inform our- 
selves briefly on its most important practices and 
phases (I leave on one side, as stands to reason, 
the actual philosophic war against the feeling of 
depression which is usually simultaneous — it is 
interesting enough, but too absurd, too practically 
negligible, too full of cobwebs, too much of a 
hole-and-corner affair, especially when pain is 
proved to be a mistake, on the naif hypothesis 
that pain must needs vanish when the mistake 
underlying it is recognised — but behold ! it does 
anything but vanish . . .). That dominant de- 
pression is primarily fought by weapons which 
reduce the consciousness of life itself to the 
lowest degree. Wherever possible, no more wishes, 
no more wants ; shun everything which produces 
emotion, which produces " blood " (eating no salt, 
the fakir hygiene) ; no love ; no hate ; equanimity ; 
no revenge ; no getting rich ; no work ; begging ; 
as far as possible, no woman, or as little woman 
as possible ; as far as the intellect is concerned, 
Pascal's principle, " il faut s'abetir." To put the 
result in ethical and psychological language, " self- 
annihilation," " sanctification " ; to put it in physio- 
logical language, " hypnotism " — the attempt to 
find some approximate human equivalent for what 
hibernation is for certain animals, for what cestiva- 
tion is for many tropical plants, a minimum of 
assimilation and metabolism in which life just 
manages to subsist without really coming into the 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEAL,S ? 171 

consciousness. An amazing amount of human 
energy has been devoted to this object — perhaps 
uselessly? There cannot be the slightest doubt 
but that such sportsmen of " saintliness," in whom 
at times nearly every nation has abounded, have 
really found a genuine relief from that which 
they have combated with such a rigorous training 
— in countless cases they really escaped by the 
help of their system of hypnotism away from deep 
physiological depression ; their method is conse- 
quently counted among the most universal ethno- 
logical facts. Similarly it is improper to consider 
such a plan for starving the physical element and 
the desires, as in itself a symptom of insanity (as a 
clumsy species of roast-beef-eating " freethinkers " 
and Sir Christophers are fain to do) ; all the more 
certain is it that their method can and does pave 
the way to all kinds of mental disturbances, for 
instance, " inner lights " (as far as the case of 
the Hesychasts of Mount Athos), auditory and 
visual hallucinations, voluptuous ecstasies and 
effervescences of sensualism (the history of St. 
Theresa). The explanation of such events given 
by the victims is always the acme of fanatical 
falsehood ; this is self-evident. Note well, however, 
the tone of implicit gratitude that rings in the 
very will for an explanation of such a character. 
The supreme state, salvation itself, that.£nal. goal 
of uriiversal hypnosis and peace, is always regarded 
by them as the mystery of mysteries, which even 
the most supreme symbols are inadequate to ex- 
press; it is regarded as an entry arid homecsining 
to the essence of things, as a liberation from all 



172 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

illusions, as " knowledge," as " truth," as " heing" as 
t an escape from every end, every wish, every action, 
i as something even beyond Good and Evil. 
I " Good and Evil," quoth the Buddhists, " both are 
fetters. The perfect man is master of them both." 
" The done and the undone," quoth the disciple 
of the Vedanta, " do him no hurt ; the good and 
the evil he shakes from off him, sage that he is; 
his kingdom suffers no more from any act ; good 
and evil, he goes beyond them both." — An ab- 
solutely Indian conception, as much Brahmanist 
as Buddhist. Neither in the Indian nor in the 
Christian doctrine is this " Redemption " regarded 
as attainable by means of virtue and moral improve- 
ment, however high they may place the value of 
the hypnotic efficiency of virtue : keep clear on 
this point — indeed it simply corresponds with the 
facts. The fact that they remained irue on this 
point is perhaps to be regarded as the best speci- 
men of realism in the three great religions, abso- 
lutely soaked as they are with morality, with this 
one exception. " For those who know, there is 
no duty." " Redemption is not attained by the 
acquisition of virtues ; for redemption consists 
in being one with Brahman, who is incapable of 
acquiring any perfection ; and equally little does 
it consist in the giving up of faults, for the 
Brahman, unity with whom is what constitutes 
redemption, is eternally pure" (these passages 
are from the Commentaries of the Cankara, quoted 
from the first real European expert of the Indian 
philosophy, my friend Paul Deussen). We wish, 
therefore, to pay honour to the idea of " redemp- 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 173 

tion " in the great religions, but it is somewhat 
hard to remain serious in view of the appreciation 
meted out to the deep sleep by these exhausted 
pessimists who are too tired even to dream — to 
the deep sleep considered, that is, as already a 
fusing into Brahman, as the attainment of tn^ 
unio mystica with God. " When he has com- 
pletely gone to sleep," says on this point the 
oldest and most venerable " script," " and come to 
perfect rest, so that he sees no more any vision, 
then, oh dear one, is he united with Being, he has 
entered into his own self — encircled by the Self 
with its absolute knowledge, he has no more any 
consciousness of that which is without or of that 
which is within. Day and night cross not these 
bridges, nor age, nor death, nor suffering, nor 
good deeds, nor evil deeds." " In deep sleep," 
say similarly the believers in this deepest of the 
three great religions, " does the soul lift itself from 
out this body of ours, enters the supreme light and 
stands out therein in its true shape : therein is it 
the supreme spirit itself, which travels about, while 
it jests and plays and enjoys itself, whether with 
women, or chariots, or friends ; there do its thoughts 
turn no more back to this appanage of a body, to 
which the ' prana ' (the vital breath) is harnessed 
like a beast of burden to the cart." None the 
less we will take care to realise (as we did when 
discussing " redemption ") that in spite of all its 
pomps of Oriental extravagance this simply ex- 
presses the same criticism on life as did the clear, 
cold, Greekly cold, but yet suffering Epicurus. 
jThe hypnotic sensation of nothingness, the peace 




THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

of deepest sleep, anaesthesia in short — that is what 
passes with the sufferers and the absolutely de- 
pressed for, forsooth, their suprenne good, their 
value of values ; that is what must be treasured 
by them as something positive, be felt by them as 
the essence of the Positive (according to the same 
logic of the feelings, nothingness is in all pessi- 
mistic religions called God). j> 



Such a hypnotic deadening of sensibility and 
susceptibility to pain, which presupposes some- 
what rare powers, especially courage, contempt of 
opinion, intellectual stoicism, is less frequent than 
another and certainly easier training which is 
tried against states of depression. I mean 
mechanical activity. It is indisputable that a 
suffering existence can be thereby considerably 
alleviated. This fact is called to-day by the 
somewhat ignoble title of the " Blessing of work." 
The alleviation consists in the attention of the 



jTh 



sufferer being absol utely diverted from suffe ring, in 
' the incessant monopoly of the consciousness by 

action, so t hat~"conseq uently there is little Toom ^ 
iieftrfbr suffering — for narro w is it, this chamb er of^ 
"h uman conscTousness ! | Mechanical__actiYily_aod 

its corollaries, such as~absolute regularityjpunctili- 



ous iinreasoning obedience^jthe _chroiiic^routijie^ 
life, ^Ee^Tomplete occupation of time,_acertain 
iTBerty to be ijmpersonal, nay, a jrainingjn " fm-" 
pefsorialitYj^ jelfjiorgetfulness. " inc uria sui " — with 
~whaLt thoroughness and expert subtlety have all 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 17S 

these methods been exploited by the ascetic priest 
in his war with pain ! 

When he has to tackle sufferers of the lower 
orders, slaves, or prisoners (or women, who for the 
most part are a compound of labour-slave and 
prisoner), all he has to do is to juggle a little 
with the names, and to rechristen, so as to make 
them see henceforth a benefit, a comparative 
happiness, in objects which they hated — the slave's 
discontent with his lot was at any rate not invented 
by the priests. An even more popular means of 
fighting depression is the ordaining of a little joy, 
which is easily accessible and can be made into a 
rule; this medication is frequently used in con- 
junction with the former ones. The most frequent] 
form in vjiich joy is prescribed as a cure is the 
joy in producing joy (such as doing good, giving 
presents, alleviating, helping, exhorting, comforting, 
praising, treating with distinction) ; together with 
the prescription of " love your neighbo ur." | The 
ascetic priest prescribes, though in the most 
cautious doses, what is practically a stimulation 
of the strongest and most life-assertive impulse — 
the Will for Power. The happiness involved in 
the " smallest superiority " which is the con- 
comitant of all benefiting, helping, extolling, 
making one's self useful, is the most ample consola- 
tion, of which, if they are well-advised, physio- 
logical distortions avail themselves : in other 
cases they hurt each other, and naturally in obedi- 
ence to the same radical instinct. An investiga- 
tion of the origin of Christianity in the Roman 
world shows that co-operative unions for poverty, 



176 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

sickness, and burial sprang up in the lowest stratum 
of contemporary society, amid which the chief 
antidote against depression, the little joy experi- 
enced in mutual benefits, was deliberately fostered. 
Perchance this was then a novelty, a real dis- 
covery ? This conjuring up of the will for co-opera- 
tion, for family organisation, for communal life, 
for " Ccenacula" necessarily brought the Will 
for Power, which had been already infinitesimally 
stimulated, to a new and much fuller manifesta- 
tion. The herd organisation is a genuine advance 
and triumph in the fight with depression. With 
the growth of the community there matures even 
to individuals a new interest, which often enough 
takes him out of the more personal element in his 
discontent, his aversion to himself, the ," despectus 
sui" of Geulincx. f^U sick and diseased people 
strive instinctively after a herd-organisation, out 
of a desire to shake off their sense of oppressive 
discomfort and weakness ; the ascetic priest 
divines this instinct and promotes it ; wherever a 
herd exists it is the instinct of weakness which 
has wished for the herd, and the cleverness of the 
priests /which has organised it, for, mark this: by 
an equally natural necessity the strong strive as 
much for isolation as the weak for union : when 
the former bind themselves it is only with a view 
to an aggressive joint action and joint satisfaction 
of their Will for Power, much against the wishes 
of their individual consciences ; the latter, on the 
contrary, range themselves together with positive 
delight in such a muster — their instincts are as 
much gratified thereby as the instincts of the 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 77 

"born master" (that is, the solitary beast-of-prey 
species of man) are disturbed and wounded to the 
quick by organisatio n. | There is always lurking 
beneath every oligarchy — such is the universal 
lesson of history — the desire for tyranny. Every 
oligarchy is continually quivering with the tension 
of the effort required by each individual to keep 
mastering this desire. (Such, e.g., was the Greek ; 
Plato shows it in a hundred places, Plato, who 
knew his contemporaries — and himself^ 



19. 

I The methods employed by the ascetic priest, 
which we have already learnt to know — stifling 
of all vitality, mechanical energy, the little joy, 
and especially the method of " love your neigh- 
bour" herd-organisation, the awaking of the 
communal consciousness of power, to such a pitch 
that the individual's disgust with himself becomes 
eclipsed by his delight in the thriving of the 
community — these are, according to modern 
standards, the " innocent " methods employed in 
the fight with depressi on ;^ let us turn now to 
the more interesting topic of the '' guilty " 
methods. The guilty methods spell one thing : 
to produce emotional excess — which is used as the 
most efficacious anaesthetic against their depress- 
ing state of protracted pain ; this is why priestly 
ingenuity has proved quite inexhaustible in 
thinking out this one question : " By what means 
can you produce an emotional excess ? " This 
sounds harsh : it is manifest that it would sound 
M 



178 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

nicer and would grate on one's ears less, if I 
were to say, forsooth : " The ascetic priest made 
use at all times of the enthusiasm contained in 
all strong emotions." But what is the good of 
still soothing the delicate ears of our modern 
effeminates ? What is the good on our side of 
budging one single inch before their verbal 
Pecksniffianism. For us psychologists to do that 
would be at once practical Pecksniffianism, apart 
from the fact of its nauseating us. The good 
taste (others might say, the righteousness) of a 
psychologist nowadays consists, if at all, in com- 
bating the shamefully moralised language with 
which all modern judgments on men and things 
are smeared. For, do not deceive yourself: what 
constitutes the chief characteristic of modern souls 
and of modern books is not the lying, but the 
innocence which is part and parcel of their intel- 
lectual dishonesty. The inevitable running up 
against this "innocence" everywhere constitutes 
the most distasteful feature of the somewhat 
dangerous business which a modern psychologist 
has to undertake: it is a part of our great 
danger — it is a road which perhaps leads us 
straight to the great nausea — I know quite well 
the purpose which all modern books will and can 
serve (granted that they last, which I am not 
afraid of, and granted equally that there is to 
be at some future day a generation with a more 
rigid, more severe, and healthier taste) — the 
function which all modernity generally will serve 
with posterity: that of an emetic, — and this by 
reason of its moral sugariness and falsity, its 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 1 79 

ingrained feminism, which it is pleased to call 
" Idealism," and at any rate believes to be 
idealism. Our cultured men of to-day, our 
" good " men, do not lie — that is true ; but it does 
not redound to their honour ! The real lie, the 
genuine, determined, " honest " lie (on whose 
value you can listen to Plato) would prove too 
tough and strong an article for them by a long 
way ; it would be asking them to do what people 
have been forbidden to ask them to do, to open 
their eyes to their own selves, and to learn to 
distinguish between " true " and " false " in their 
own selves. The dishonest lie alone suits them : 
everything which feels a good man is perfectly 
incapable of any other attitude to anything than 
that of a dishonourable liar, an absolute liar, but 
none the less an innocent liar, a blue-eyed liar, 
a virtuous liar. These " good men," they are 
all now tainted with morality through and 
through, and as far as honour is concerned they 
are disgraced and corrupted for all eternity. 
Which of them could stand a further truth '■ about 
man"? or, put more tangibly, which of them 
could put up with a true biography? One or 
two instances : Lord Byron composed a most 
personal autobiography, but Thomas Moore was 
" too good " for it ; he burnt his friend's papers. 
Dr. Gwinner, Schopenhauer's executor, is said 
to have done the same ; for Schopenhauer as well 
wrote much about himself, and perhaps also 
«(g"amj^ himself (ei? eavrov). The virtuous Ameri- 
can Thayer, Beethoven's biographer, suddenly 
stopped his work : he had come to a certain 



l8o THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

point in that honourable and simple life, and 
could stand it no longer. Moral : What sensible 
man nowadays writes one honest word about 
himself? He must already belong to the Order 
of Holy Foolhardiness. We are promised an 
autobiography of Richard Wagner ; who doubts 
but that it would be a clever autobiography? 
Think, forsooth, of the grotesque horror which 
the Catholic priest Janssen aroused in Germany 
with his inconceivably square and harmless 
pictures of the German Reformation ; what 
wouldn't people do if some real psychologist 
were to tell us about a genuine Luther, tell us, 
not with the moralist simplicity of a country 
priest or the sweet and cautious modesty of a 
Protestant historian, but say with the fearlessness 
of a Taine, that springs from force of character 
and not from a prudent toleration of force. (The 
Germans, by the bye, have already produced the 
classic specimen of this toleration — they may 
well be allowed to reckon him as one of their 
own, in Leopold Ranke, that bom classical 
advocate of every causa fortior, that cleverest 
of all the clever opportunists.) 



20. 

But you will soon understand me. — Putting it 
shortly, t here is reason enough, is t here n ot, for 
JUS___ps.yd^o^sts nowadays never getting^~a^^ 

from a, certain ...miatrust of out own selves^^ 

Probably even we ourselves are still " too good " 
for our ^ work • probably, whatever contempt we 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ?(l8 1 

feel for this popular craze^ for morality, we 
7wsRlves_jfe_perhaps none the iess-its victims^ 
v rsy\~3.nd slay ggj_.prQbaMy_Jt_jnfects_even us. 
Of what was that diplomat warning us, when 
he said to his colleagues : " Let us especially mis- 
trust our first impulses, gentlemen ! tkey are 
almost always gvod" t So should nowadays every 
psychologist talk to his colleagues. And thus 
we get back to our problem, which in point of 
fact does require from us a certain severity, a 
certain mistrust especially against " first impulses." 
The ascetic ideal in the__servj££. — qf—p-mfected 
^emotio nal excess T- — hewho remembers the previous 
essay will already partially anticipate the essential 
meaning compressed into these above ten words. 
The thorough unswitching of t hgJruman_§Qul,_thg 
plungi ng of it into terror, frost, ardour, rapture, 
so as to free"Tt^"as through ~som^JightnIi^]JEock7 
from all the smallness and pettiness of unhappi- 
ness, depression, and discomfort : what waysHead" 
to ^w_goal? AnJ which ol these ways"does~s6 
inost safely ? ... At b ottom all great emotio ns 
^^MgJhisjiQHgcjpro vided that they find a sudde n 
o utlet — emotions such as rage, fear, lust, revenge, 
hope, triumph, despair, cruelty ^ and, in sooth, the 
ascetic priest has had no scruples in taking into 
his service the whole pack of hounds that rage 
in the human kennel, unleashing now these and 
now those, with the same constant object of 
waking man out of his protracted melancholy, 
of chasing away, at any rate for a time, his dull 
pain, his shrinking misery, but always under the 
sanction of a religious^ interpretation and justifica- 



1 82 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

tion. This emotional excess has subsequently to 
be paid /or~ this is self-evident — it makes "The 
tlt^more in^:^^^ana~'EEeretore tEis~Tan3~~oT remedy 
for pain is~ according to moderrT stanHarcls^a 
" guilty ^nong . " 

The dictates of fairness, however, require that 
we should all the more emphasise the fact that 
this remedy is applied with a good conscience, 
that the ascetic priest has prescribed it in the 
most implicit belief in its utility and indispens- 
ability; — often enough almost collapsing in the 
presence of the pain which he created ;— that we 
should similarly emphasise the fact that the 
violent physiological revenges of such excesses, 
even perhaps the mental disturbances, are not 
absolutely inconsistent with the general tenor of 
this kind of remedy ; this remedy, which, as we 
have shown previously, is not for the purpose of 
healing diseases, but of fighting the unhappiness 
of that depression, the alleviation and deadening 
of which was its object. The object was conse- 
quently achieved. /The keynote by which the 
ascetic priest was enabled to get every kind of 
agonising and ecstatic music to play on the 
fibres of the human soul — was, as every one knows, 
the exploitation of the feeling of "guilt."] I 
have already indicated in the pf'evious essay the 
origin of this feeling — as a piece of animal 
psychology and nothing else : we were thus con- 
fronted with the feeling of " guilt," in its crude 
state, as it were. It was first in the hands of 
the priest, real artist that he was in the feeling of 
guilt, that it took shape — oh, what a shape ! 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 1 83 

r ^Sin " — for that is the name of the new priestly 
versi on of the anim al " bad-conscience " (the in- 
verted cruelty) — has up to the present been the 
Efreate st event in the history of the diseased soul : 
in " sin " we find the most perilous and fatal master- 
piece of religious interpretation,^ \ Imagine_^ man, 
s uffering from himself, some way or other but at any 
r ate phy siologically, perhaps like an animal shut 
up in a cage, norcleaFas to the why and the 
wheretore ! Tmagme him iri~TTis"desire for reasons 
—reasons briiig'' relief — in his desire again for 
re medies , n^xqtics at last, consulting one, who 
knows even the occult — ^an3^~see71o~an3~^beH51(f,Tie 
gets a hmt trom his wizard, the ascetic priest, hi^ 
first hint on the " cause " of his trouble : he iriiisl 
search tor it in himself., in his guiltiness, in a piece 
"oTthe past, he must understand his very suffering 
as a state ojT^unishmentT^Y^ hzs, heard, he has 
understood, has the unfortunate : he is now in the 
plight of a hen round which a line has been drawn. 
He never gets out of the circle of lines. The sick 
man has been turned into " the sinner " — and now 
for a few thousand years we never get away from 
the sight of this new invalid, of " a sinner " — shall 
we ever get away from it ? — wherever we just look, 
everywhere the hypnotic gaze of the sinner always 
moving in one direction (in the direction of guilt, 
the only cause of suffering) ; everywhere the evil 
conscience, this ^^ greuliche thier" * to use Luther's 
language ; everywhere rumination over the past, a 
distorted view of action, the gaze of the "green-eyed 

* " Horrible beast." 



184 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

monster" turned on all action; everywhere thewilful 
misunderstanding of suffering, its transvaluation 
into feelings of guilt, fear of retribution ; every- 
where the scourge, the hairy shirt, the starving body, 
contrition ; everywhere the sinner breaking himself 
on the ghastly wheel of a restless and morbidly 
eager conscience ; leverywhere mute pain, extreme 
fear, the agony of a tortured heart, the spasms of 
an unknown happiness, the shriek for "r edemp tion," J 
In point of fact, thanks to this system of procedure, 
the old depression, dullnesSj andjati^ue were abso- 
l.uSiv:.£Qnq5e£e3ZI ife itsel f became verfj ntsrestius 
again, awake, eternally awake, sleepless, glowing, 
~Bi5rnraway, exhausted and yet not tired — ^^suSiwas" 
the figure cut by man, "the siriner,"'wKo was initi- 
ated into these mysteries. This grand old wizard 
of an ascetic priest fighting with depression — he 
had clearly triumphed, Ms kingdom had come : 
men no longer grumbled at pain, men panted after 
pain : '^_^oy£_ ^ciin ! M ore pain ! " So for 
centuries on end shrieked the demand of his 
acolytes and initiates. Every emotional excess 
which hurt ; eve rything which_ broke,~b vertfirew/ 
crushe d. trans porTgdj^avished ; the mystery of 
tortu re-cham bers, the i nggaiutyloILheirjtgglf — ^all 
this was now discovered, divined, exploited, all 
this was at the service of the wizard, all this served 
to promote the triumph of his ideal, the ascetic ideal. 
" My kingdom is not of this world" quoth he, both 
at the beginning and at the end : had he still the 
right to talk like that? — Goethe has maintained 
that there are only thirty-six tragic situations : we 
would infer from that, did we not know otherwise 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 85 

that Goethe was no ascetic priest. He — knows 
more. 



21. 

So far as all this kind of priestly medicine- 
mongering, the " guilty " kind, is concerned, every 
word of criticism is superfluous. As for the sug- 
gestion that emotional excess of the type, which 
in these cases the ascetic priest is fain to order to 
his sick patients (under the most sacred euphemism, 
as is obvious, and equally impregnated with the 
sanctity of his purpose)' has ever really been of 
use to any sick man, who, forsooth, would feel in- 
clined to maintain a proposition of that character ? 
At any rate, some understanding should, be come 
to as to the expression " be of use." Ilf you only 
wish to express that such a system of treatment 
has reformed man, I do not gainsay it : I merely 
add that " reformed " conveys to my mind as 
much as "tamed," "weakened," "discouraged," "re- 
fined," " daintified," " emasculated " (and thus it 
means almost as much as injured^ But when you 
have to deal principally with sick, depressed, and 
oppressed creatures, such a system, even granted 
that it makes the ill " better," under any circum- 
stances also makes them more ill : ask the mad- 
doctors the invariable result of a methodical appli- 
cation of penance-torture, contrition, and salvation 
ecstasies. Similarly ask history, fin every body 
politic where the ascetic priest has established 
this treatment of the sick, disease has on every 
occasion spread with sinister speed throughout 



1 86 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

its length and breadthj What was always the 
"result"? A shattered nervous system, in addition 
to the existing malady, and this in the greatest 
as in the smallest, in the individuals as in masses. 
We find, in consequence of the penance and re- 
demption-training, awful epileptic epidemics, the 
greatest known to history, such as the St. Vitus and 
St. John dances of the Middle Ages ; we find, as 
another phase of its after-effect, frightful mutila- 
tions and chronic depressions, by means of which 
the temperament of a nation or a city (Geneva, 
Bale) is turned once for all into its opposite ; — 
this training, again, is responsible for the witch- 
hysteria, a phenomenon analogous to somnambul- 
ism (eight great epidemic outbursts of this only 
between i 564 and 1605) ; — we find similarly in its 
train those delirious death-cravings of large masses, 
whose awful "shriek," "evvivala morte!" was heard 
over the whole of Europe, now interrupted by volup- 
tuous variations and anon by a rage for destruc- 
tion, just as the same emotional sequence with the 
same intermittencies and sudden changes is now 
universally observed in every case where the ascetic 
doctrine of sin scores once more a great success 
(religious neurosis appears as a manifestation of the 
devil,thereis no doubt of it. What is it? QucBritur). 
I Speaking generally, the ascetic ideal and its sublime- 
moral cult, this most ingenious, reckless, and peril- 
ous systematisation of all methods of emotional 
excess, is writ large in a dreadful and unforgettable 
fashion on the whole history of man, and unfortun- 
ately not only on historyj^ I was scarcely able to 
put forward any other element which attacked the 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 87 



and race efficiency of Europeans with more 
destructive power than did this ideal ; it can be 
dubbed, without exaggeration, the real fatality in the 
history of the health of the European man. At the 
most you can merely draw a comparison with the 
specifically German influence : I mean the alcohol 
poisoning of Europe, which up to the present has 
kept pace exactly with the political and racial pre- 
dominance of the Germans (where they inoculated 
their blood, there too did they inoculate their vice). 
Third in the series comes syphilis — magno sed 
proximo intervallo. 

22. 

The ascetic priest has, wherever he has obtained 
the mastery, corrupted the health of the soul, he 
has consequently also corrupted taste in artibus 
et litteris — he corrupts it still. " Consequently ? " 
I hope I shall be granted this " consequently " ; 
at any rate, I am not going to prove it first. One 
solitary indication, it concerns the arch-book of 
Christian literature, their real model, their " book- 
in-itself." In the very midst of the Grseco-Roman 
splendour, which was also a splendour of books, 
face to face with an ancient world of writings 
which had not yet fallen into decay and ruin, at a 
time when certain books were still to be read, to 
possess which we would give nowadays half our 
literature in exchange, at that time the simplicity 
and vanity of Christian agitators (they are gener- 
ally called Fathers of the Church) dared to declare : 
"We too have our classical literature, we do not 
need that of the Greeks" — and meanwhile they 



1 88 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

proudly pointed to their books of legends, their 
letters of apostles, and their apologetic tractlets, 
just in the same way that to-day the English 
" Salvation Army " wages its fight against Shake- 
speare and other " heathens " with an analogous 
literature. You already guess it, I do not like the 
" New Testament " ; it almost upsets me that I 
stand so isolated in my taste so far as concerns 
this valued, this over-valued Scripture ; the taste of 
two thousand years is against me ; but what 
boots it ! " Here I stand ! I cannot help my- 
self " * — I have the courage of my bad taste. The 
Old Testament — yes, that is something quite 
different, all honour to the Old Testament ! I find 
therein great men, an heroic landscape, and one 
of the rarest phenomena in the world, the in- 
comparable naivete of the strong heart; further 
still, I find a people. In the New, on the contrary, 
just a hostel of petty sects, pure rococo of the 
soul, twisting angles and fancy touches, nothing but 
conventicle air, not to forget an occasional whiff of 
bucolic sweetness which appertains to the epoch 
{and the Roman province) and is less Jewish than 
Hellenistic. Meekness and braggadocio cheek by 
jowl ; an emotional garrulousness that almost 
deafens ; passionate hysteria, but no passion ; pain- 
ful pantomime ; here manifestly every one lacked 
good breeding. How dare any one make so much 
fuss about their little failings as do these pious 
little fellows ! No one cares a straw about it — let 

* " Here I stand ! I cannot help myself. God help me ! 
Amen" — were Luther's words before the Reichstag at 
Worms.— H. B. S. 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 89 

alone God. Finally they actually wish to have 
"the crown of eternal life," do all these little 
provincials ! In return for what, in sooth ? For 
what end? It is impossible to carry insolence 
any further. An immortal Peter ! who could 
stand him ! They have an ambition which makes 
one laugh: the thing dishes up cut and dried his 
most personal life, his melancholies, and common- 
or-garden troubles, as though the Universe itself 
were under an obligation to bother itself about 
them, for it never gets tired of wrapping up God 
Himself in the petty misery in which its troubles 
are involved. And how about the atrocious form of 
this chronic hobnobbing with God ? This Jewish, 
and not merely Jewish, slobbering and clawing 
importunacy towards God ! — There exist little 
despised " heathen nations " in East Asia, from 
whom these first Christians could have learnt 
something worth learning, a little tact in worship- 
ing ; these nations do not allow themselves to say 
aloud the name of their God. This seems to me 
delicate enough, it is certain that it is too delicate, 
and not only for primitive Christians ; to take a 
contrast, just recollect Luther, the most " eloquent " 
and insolent peasant whom Germany has had, 
think of the Lutherian tone, in which he felt quite 
the most in his element during his tite-d-tites 
with God. Luther's opposition to the mediaeval 
saints of the Church (in particular, against " that 
devil's hog, the Pope "), was, there is no doubt, at 
bottom the opposition of a boor, who was offended 
at the good etiquette of the Church, that worship- 
etiquette of the sacerdotal code, which only admits 



1 90 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

to the holy of holies the initiated and the silent, 
and shuts the door against the boors. These 
definitely were not to be allowed a hearing in this 
planet — but Luther the peasant simply wished it 
otherwise ; as it was, it was not German enough for 
him. He personally wished himself to talk direct, 
to talk personally, to talk " straight from the 
shoulder" with his God. Well, he's done it. 
The ascetic ideal, you will guess, was at no time 
and in no place, a school of good taste, still less of 
good manners — at the best it was a school for 
sacerdotal manners : that is, it contains in itself 
something which was a deadly enemy to all good 
manners. Lack of measure, opposition to measure 
it is itself a " non plus ultra" 



23- 

The ascetic ideal has corrupted not only health 
and taste, there are also third, fourth, fifth, and 
sixth things which it has corrupted — I shall take 
care not to go through the catalogue (when should 
I get to the end ?). I have here to expose not 
what this ideal effected ; but rather only what it 
means, on what it is based, what lies lurking 
behind it and under it, that of which it is the pro- 
visional expression, an obscure expression bristling 
with queries and misunderstandings. And with 
this object only in view I presumed " not to spare " 
my readers a glance at the awfulness of its results, 
a glance at its fatal results ; I did this to prepare 
them for the final and most awful aspect presented 
to me by the question of the significance of that 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 191 

ideal. Vyh^t is the significance pX..the„ power of 
that idealjJbe_monstjousness_ofjts ^ower ? Why- 
is it given such an amount of scope? Why is 
not a better resistance offered against it ? The 
ascetic ideal expresses one will : where is the 
opposition will, in which an opposition ideal 
expresses itself? The ascetic ideal has an aim- — 
this goal is, putting it generally, that all the other 
interests of human life should, measured by its 
standard, appear petty and narrow ; it explains 
epochs, nations, men, in reference to this one end ; 
it forbids any other interpretation, any other end ; 
it repudiates, denies, affirms, confirms, only in the 
sense of its own interpretation (and was there ever 
a more thoroughly elaborated system of interpre- 
tation ?) ; it subjects itself to no power, rather does 
it believe In its own precedence over everjr"power 
^^^^it~believes that nothing~p6w^firl exists "in-the 
world that has not first got to receive~fronr""it""~a 
meaningj_a_j;ight_to^^^exist,_a^ Y^^, as ^eing an 
i nstrument in its w ork,_a-..wa-V-and_means^tQ_iis, 
end, to one end. Where is the counte rpart o{ 
tS 5~"complete sys te m of will, end, and interpreta- 
t ion ? Why is the counterpart lacking WKere 
is the other " one aim " ? But I am told it is not 
lacking, tnat not "only has it fought a long and 
fortunate fight with that ideal, but that further ^ 
has _ already won the mastery o ver th at ideal in 
a1] ^sppntialc ■ Ipf- ni^r w^^"le_iiiodern scjmce^ attest 
_this — that modern science, which, like th e genuin e 
reality-philosophy which i t is, manifestly believes 
in it self alone, manifestlyT ias the courage to"l3e 
itSelf, the will to be itself, and has got oiTwell 






192 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

enough without God, another world, and nega- 
tive virtues. " — 
WltR~all their noisy agitator-babble, however, 
they effect nothing with me ; these trumpeters of 
reality are bad musicians, their voices do not come 
from the deeps with sufificient audibility, t hey are no t 

I the mouthpie ce for the ab YSS,ofscientificiaiQwledge 

I -—for to-day scientific k52^?^S5_i^ ^" abyss — the 
word " science," in such trumpeter-niquths, is a pros" 
titution, an abuse^ an impertinence. The truth is 

\ j usT tTie~oppositg ^from what is maintainej _jn~lEe" 
asceHcjEiory.. Scienc e ha s to-day absolutely no 
beli ef in itself, let alone m aiTTdeal superior" to 
It self, a nd wherever science still consistTorpassidiT7 

/ love, ardour, suffering, it is not the opposition to 
that ascetic ideal, but rather the incarnation of its 

\ latest and noblest form. Does that ring strange ? 
'There are enough brave and decent working people, 
even among the learned men of to-day, who like 
their little corner, and who, just because they are 
pleased so to do, become at times indecently loud 
with their demand, that people to-day should be 
quite content, especially in science — for in science 
there is so much useful work to do. I do not deny 
it — -there is nothing I should like less than to spoil 
the delight of these honest workers in their handi- 
work ; for I rejoice in their work. But the fact of 
science requiring hard work, the fact of its having 
contented workers, is absolutely no proof of science 
as a whole having to-day one end, one will, one 
ideal, one passion for a great faith ; the contrary, as 
I have said, is the case. When science is not the 
latest manifestation of the ascetic ideal — but these 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 1 93 

are cases of such rarity, selectness, and exquisite- 
ness, as to preclude the general judgment being 
affected thereby — science is a hiding-place for every 
kind of cowardice, disbelief, remorse, despectio sui, 
bad conscience — it is the very anxiety that springs 
from having no ideal, the suffering from the lack 
of a great love, the discontent with an enforced 
moderation. Oh, what does all science not cover 
to-day? How mucETara nvTate. does itlnoF try 
Jfo^oxer ? The diligence of our best scholars, their 
senseless industry, their burning the candle of their 
brain at both ends — their very mastery in their 
handiwork — how often is the real meaning of all 
that to prevent themselves conTiiiumg to see a 
cer tain thing ? Science as a self-a naesthetic : do you 
Unow that? You wound them — every one who 
consorts with scholars experiences this — you wound 
them sometimes to the quick through just a harm- 
less word ; when you think you are paying them a 
compliment you embitter them beyond all bounds, 
simply because you didn't have {he finesse to infer 
the real kind of customers you had to tackle, 
the sufferer kind (who won't own up even to 
themselves what they really are), the dazed and 
iinrni;ifjriniis ki'nij jyho have on ly one' fear — coming 
to consciousness. 

-^ 24 

And now look at the other side, at those rare 
cases, of which I spoke, the most supreme idealists 
to be found nowadays among philosophers and 
scholars. Have we, perchance, found in them the 
sought-for opponents of the ascetic ideal, its anti- 
N 



194 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

idealists} In fact, they believe themselves to be 
such, these " unbelievers " (for they are all of them 
that) : It seeriisThat this ideaj s their last remn ant 
of faith, tEe~i3ea of being opponents of this ideal, 
so earnest are they on this subject, so passionate 
in word and gesture; — but does it follow that 
what they believe must necessarily be truel We 
" knowers " have grown by degrees suspicious of 
all kinds of believers, our suspicion has step by 
step habituated us to draw just the opposite con- 
clusions to what people have drawn before ; that 
is to say, wherever the strength of a belief is parti- 
cularly prominent to draw the conclusion of the 
difficulty of proving what is believed, the conclusion 
of its actual improbability. f We do no t again deny 
that " faith produces salvation " Vfor~iMf^very 
'^«/5«Jwe._d^'3enyJ:hat faith /roz'4J_anytHingjJ^~ 
a .strong faith, which produces ha ppiness, causes 
suspicion of the object of that faith, it does no t 
"establish ~its " truth," it does establish a certain 
prob ability of — illusiou^ What is now the~posi- 
tion in these cases ? These solitaries and deniers 
of to-day; these fanatics in one thing, in their claim 
to intellectual cleanness ; these hard, stern, contin- 
ent, heroic spirits, who constitute the glory of our 
time ; all these pale atheists, anti- Christians, im- 
moralists. Nihilists; these sceptics, " ephectics," and 
" hectics " of the intellect (in a certain sense they 
are the latter, both collectively and individually); 
these supreme idealists of knowledge, in whom 
alone nowadays the intellectual conscience dwells 
and is alive — in point of fact they believe them- 
selves as far away as possible from the ascetic 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 195 

ideal, do these " free, very free spirits " : and yet, 
if I may reveal what they themselves cannot see 
— for they stand too near themselves : this ideal is 
simply their ideal, they represent it nowadays and 
perhaps no one else, they themselves are its most 
spiritualised product, its most advanced picket of 
skirmishers and scouts, its most insidious delicate 
and elusive form of seduction. — If I am in any 
way a reader of riddles, then I will be one with this 
sentence : for some time past there have been no 
free spirits ; for they siiir~BeUeve in WufK.~ When 
the Christian TS'usaSers in the East came into 
collision with that invincible order of assassins, 
that order of free spirits /ar excellence, whose lowest 
grade lives in a state of discipline such as no order 
of monks has ever attained, then in some way or 
other they managed to get an inkling of that 
symbol and tally-word, that was reserved for the 
highest grade alone as their secretum, " Nothing is" 
true, everything is allowed," — in sooth, that was 
freedom of thought, thereby was taking leave of the 
very belief in truth. Has indeed any European, 
any Christian freethinker, ever yet wandered into 
this proposition and its labyrinthine consequences ? 
Does he know from experience the Minotauros of 
this den. — I doubt it — nay, I know otherwise. 
Nothing is more really alien to these " mono- 
fanatics," these so-called " free spirits," than freedom 
and unfettering in that sense ; in no respect are 
they more closely tied, the absolute fanaticism of 
their belief in truth is unparalleled. I know all this 
perhaps too much from experience at close quarters 
— that dignified philosophic abstinence to which 



196 ^ THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

-subelief like that binds its adherents, that stoicism 
of the intellect, which eventually vetoes negation 
as rigidly as it does affirmation, that wish for 
standing still in front of the actual, the factum 
brutum, that fatalism in "fetitsfaits" [ce petit faital- 
ism, as I call it), in which French Science now 
attempts a kind of moral superiority over German, 
this renunciation of interpretation generally (that 
is, of forcing, doctoring, abridging, omitting, sup- 
pressing, inventing, falsifying, and all the other 
essential attributes of interpretation) — all this, con- 
sidered broadly, expresses the asceticism of virtue, 
quite as efficiently as does any repudiation of the 
senses (it is at bottom only a modus of that repudia- 
tion). But what forces it intq^that unqualified 
will_for truth is iihe faith in the ascetic ideal itself, 
even_thougH"Tf "taKe~tEeTorm of its unconscious 
iniperatives,-— make lio"' mistake about it, it is~tEe~ 
faith, I repeat, in a ■metaphysica l valu ej^nintrinsic^ 
j^"ueortruth, of a cKaracter which is only w^ranted_ 
and guaranteed in this ideal (it stands and falls with 
thartd"eal)7~ Judged strictly, there does not exist 
a science without its " hypotheses," the thought of 
such a science is inconceivable, illogical : a philo- 
sophy, a faith, must always exist first to enable 
science to gain thereby a direction, a meaning, a 
limit and method, a ri£:ht to existence. (He who 
holds a contrary opinion on the subject — ^he, for ex- 
ample, who takes it upon himself to establish philo- 
sophy " upon a strictly scientific basis " — has first 
got to " turn up-side-down " not only philosophy 
but also truth itself — the gravest insult which 
could possibly be offered to two such respectable 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS? 197 

females !) Yes, there is no doubt about it — and 
here I quote my Joyful Wisdom, cp. Book V. Aph. 
344 : " The tnan who is truthful in that daring 
and extreme f ashion, which is the presupposition 
of the faith in science, asserts thereby a different' 
-world fro m that of life, na ture, and history ; and In 
soTaTas he asserts the existence ofjhat^different 
world, come, must he notsinularly repudiate jts 
counterpartT^rs" world , oar w orld? Th e belief on 
whi ch our faith in scien ce is based has remained to 
this ^y a me taphysjcaLbelief — even we knowers 
of to-day, we godless foes of metaphysics, we too 
take our fire from that conflagration which was 
kindled by a thousand-year-old faith, from that 
C hristian belief, which was also Plato's benef7tHe 
beli ef that God is truth, that truth is Siyine. . . . 
But what if this belief becomes more and more in- 
credible, what if nothing proves itself tob^ divine, 
unless It be error, blindness, lies-— -what if God 
Himse^^roved_Himself_.to- be^our oldest lie? " — 
It is necessary to stop at this point and to consider 
the situation carefully. Science itself now needs a 
j ustification (which is not for a minute to say that 
there is such a justification). Turn in this context 
to the most ancient and the most modern philo- 
sophers : they all fail to realise the extent of the 
need of a justification on the part of the Will for 
Truth — here is a gap in every philosophy — what 
is it caused by ? Because up to the present the 
ascetic ideal dominated all philosophy, because 
Truth was fixed as Being, as God, as the Supreme 
Court of Appeal, because Truth was not allowed 
to be a problem. Do you understand this 



(igS \ THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

" allowed " ? 1 F rom the minute that the belief in 
the God of t he ascetic ideal is repudiatedTth ere " 
exTsts a ite w^odlem : the problem of the vaTueoT^^ 
truth. [ The Will for Truth needed a critiq ^ue^^^r' 
us "define b y these words-QUt-DisoLlask^iJhe value 
of truth is tentatively toJbe_ccMedin_^uestionr7y~:^ 
' (If this seems too laconically expressed, I recom- 
mend the reader to peruse again that passage from 
the Joyful Wisdom which bears the title, " How far 
we also are still pious," Aph. 344, and best of all 
the whole fifth book of that work, cis well as the 
Preface to The Dawn of Day!) 



25. 

No ! You can't get round me with science, when 
I search for the natural antagonists of the ascetic 
ideal, when I put the question : " Where is the op- 
posed will in which the opponent ideal expresses 
itself? " Science is not, by a long way, independent 
enough to fulfil this function ; in every depar tment 
sci ence needs an id eal valu e, a p o wer whi ch creates 
values,_aild.Jn__whose service it can believe in iSelf 
— scie nce itself never creates value s. Its relation 
to the aacet ic ideal js ^ot in itself antagOTiiSc"; 
speaking roughly, it r ather repre sents the progress- 
ive force in the^ inner _ evolution of thaTTdealT 
Tested more exactly, its o ppositi on and antagori^ 
isHL-are--XQncgnjM_XLQt_mtL_the ideal JtsafTlJat 
only with that ideal's niitwnrks^'ts^ outer^arb, its 
masquerade, with itstemporary harciening,stiffenm"g, 
and_dogmatising;;-it_makes-the- life jE^the ideal 
f ree on c e more, while it repudiates its superficial 




WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS 

elements. These two phenomena, science and'lEe' 
ascetic ideal, both rest on the same basis — I have 
already made this clear — t he bas is,! s ay, oft he same 
over-appreciation of truth (more accurately the 
sSme beliet m tbElmpossibtlity of valuing and of 
criticis ing tru5E J, and consequently they are neces- 
sarily allies, so that, in the event of their being 
attacked, they must always be attacked and called 
into question together. A valuation of the ascetic 
ideal inevita bly entails a~vaIu "ation '61 sclen'ce~as 
wettT'lose no time in seeing this clearly, and be 
sharp" to catch it ! { Art, I am speaking provision- 
ally, for I will treat it on some other occasion in 
greater detail, — art, I repeat, in which lying is 
sanctified and the will for deception has good con- 
science on its side, is much more fundamentally 
opposed to the^ascetic Heal than is science : Plato's 
instinctlelt this — Plato, the greatest enemy of art 
which Europe has produced up to the present. 
Plato versus Homer, that is the complete, the true 
antagoni smr^on the oiTe ji de7Tfie~wHo le4iearted 
" transcendental," t he great defamer of life ; on the 
ot her, its involuntary panegyrist, t he golden nature. 
An artistic subservi ence to the servj ce ofthe ascetic" 
ideal is consequently the most absolute artistic 
corrupt ion that there can be, though~unfortunaterv^ 
it is one of the most frequent phases, for nothing 
is more corruptible than an artis t.') Considered 
physiologically, moreover, science rests on the samci 
b asis as does the ascet ic ideal : a certain impovensh~\ 
mep,t of life is the pre suppositioEToTtEeTatter as of \ 
the former — add, frijjidity.of the emotions, slacken- 
mg ol the tempo , the substitution of dialectic for 



200 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

instinct, seriousness impressed on mien and gesture 
(^HTiousneis, that^most unmistakable sign of strenu-~" 
ous metabolism, of struggling, toiling life). Con- 
sider the periods in a nation in which the learned 
man comes into prominence ; they are the periods 
of exhaustion, often of sunset, of decay — the 
effervescing strength, the confidence in life, the con- 
fidence in the future are no more. The preponder- 
ence of the mandarins never signifies any good, any 
more than does the advent of democracy, or arbi- 
tration instead of war, equal rights for women, the 
religion of pity, and all the other symptoms of 
declining life. (Science handled as a problem ! what 
is the meaning of science ? — upon this point the 
Preface to the Birth of Tragedy^ No ! this 
" modern _ science " — mark you this we ll-— is at 
times the best ally for the ascetic ideal, 3nd_S2Ee 
very'Teason that_itJs_jLlk_ally^jvhicr^_mostjjn- 
coriscious, most automatic, most secret, and most 
subterranean ! They have been playing into each 
'Other's" hands up to the present, have these "poor 
in spirit" and the scientific opponents of that 
ideal (take care, by the bye, not to think that 
these opponents are the antithesis of this ideal, 
that they are the rich in spirit — that they are 
not; I have called them the hectic in spirit). 
As for these celebrated victories of science; 
there is no doubt that they are victories — but 
victories over what ? There was not for a single 
minute any victory among their list over the 
ascetic ideal, rather was it made stronger, that is 
to say, more elusive, more abstract, more insidious, 
from the fact that a wall, an outwork, that had got 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 20I 

built on to the main fortress and disfigured its 
appearance, should from time to time be ruthlessly 
destroyed and broken down by science. Does any 
one seriously suggest that the downfall of the theo- 
logical astronomy signified the downfall of that 
ideal ? — Has, perchance, man grown /ess in need of 
a transcendental solution of his riddle of existence, 
because since that time this existence has become 
more random, casual, and superfluous in the visible 
order of the universe? Has there not been since 
the time of Copernicus an unbroken progress in the 
self-belittling of man and his will for belittling 
himself? Alas, his belief in his dignity, his unique- 
ness, his irreplaceableness in the scheme of existence, 
is gone — he has become animal, literal, unqualified, 
and unmitigated animal, he who in his earlier belief 
was almost God (" child of God," " demi-God "). 
Since Copernicus man seems to have fallen on to 
a steep plane — he rolls faster and faster away from 
the centre — whither ? into nothingness ? into the 
"thrilling sensation of his own nothingness"! — Well ! 
this would be the straight way — to the o/<3f ideal ? — 
All science (and by no means only astronomy, with 
regard to the humiliating and deteriorating effect of 
which Kant has made a remarkable confession, " it 
annihilates my own importance"), all science, natural 
as much as unnatural — by unnaturaT"! mean'fKe 

^^^^^in^5j2iJ[^-?3=^~"°^'^?:5i^l£f^°'^* tol:alk 
man out of his present opinion ofhimself, as_thou^ 
tHat^oginion hadJBeen nothing Butabizarre piece 
of conceit ; you might go so far as to say that science "" 
finds its p eculiar pride, its peculiar bitter fcmnlSf" 
stoical ataraxia, in preserving man's contempt of 



202 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

himself, that state which it took so much trouble 



to bring about, as m an's final apd m ost serious claim 
to self-a ppre ciation (rightly so, in point of fact, for 
he who despises is always " one who has not for- 
gotten how to appreciate "). But does all this 
involve anyreal effort to counteract the ascetic ideal ? 
Is it really seriously suggested that Kant's victory 
over the theological dogmatism about "God," 
" Soul," " Freedom," " Immortality," has damaged 
that ideal in any way (as the theologians have 
imagined to be the case for a long time past) ? — 
And in this connection it does not concern us for 
a single minute, if Kant himself intended any such 
consummation. It is certain that from the time 
of Kant every type of transcendentalist is playing a 
winning game — they are emancipated from the 
theologians ; what luck ! — he has revealed to them 
that secret art, by which they can now pursue their 
" heart's desire " on their own responsibility, and 
with all the respectability of science. Similarly, 
who can grumble at the agnostics, reverers, as 
they are, of the unknown and the absolute 
mystery, if they now worship their very query as 
God? (Xaver Doudan talks somewhere of the 
ravages which I'habitude dadmirer rinintelligible 
au lieu de rester tout simplement dans Vinconnu 
has produced — the ancients, he thinks, must have 
been exempt from those ravages.) Supposing 
that everything, " known " to man, lails to 
^tisty_iiisj(ifiaEEs,_and^onjffie contrary contradicts" 
ancL horrifies them, wh at a divine way out of all 
this to be able to look for the responsibility, not 
in jhe _iLdesJjdng-!!-l)ut, ia "Jsnojving 'M;^-" There"~ 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 203 

knowledge. Consequentl y^^^&xe. _jg__„a 
^wHaF'irn'ovel elegantia syllogismi\ what 
a triumph for the ascetic ideal ! 



26. 

Or, perchance, does the whole ol modem-history 
show in its demeanouiL_greate r co nfi dence in li fe, 
greater confidence in its ideals ? It s 1nftiest_. pre- ^ 
t ension is now to be a mirror \ it repudiates all 
teleology: it will have no more " proving " ; it 
disdains to play the judge, and thereby shows its 
good taste — it asserts as little as it den ies, it 
fixes, it " describes." All this is to a high 
de gree ascetic , b ut~aF the same time it~i s~"Ccr'a' 
mnrVi frrpafpi- Ae-<^rc-f- ■n-!hiN<:fic ■ make no mistake 
about this ! You see in the historian a gloomy, 
hard, but determined gaze, — an eye that looks out 
as an isolated North Pole explorer looks out 
(perhaps so as not to look within, so as not to 
look back ?) — there is snow — here is life silenced, 
the last crows which caw here are called 
"whither?" "Vanity," "Nada" — here nothing 
more flourishes and grows, at the most the 
metapolitics of St. Petersburg and the " pity " 
of Tolstoi. But as for that other school of 
historians, a perhaps still more " modern " school, 
a voluptuous and lascivious school which ogles 
life and the ascetic ideal with equal fervour, which 
uses., the word " artist " as a glove, and has 
nowadays established a " corner " for itself, in all 
the praise given to contemplation ; oh, what a 
thirst do these sweet intellectuals excite even for 



204 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

ascetics and winter landscapes ! Nay ! The 
devil take these " contemplative " folk ! How 
much liefer would I wander with those histoficaT" 
Nihilists through the glooniiest, gr^7~ coi Tmist P:^ "--- 
nay, I shall not mind listening (supposing I have 
To choosej to one who is_£ompletely u nhisto rical 
and antUhistorical (a man, like Diihring for in- 
""slance, over whose periods a hitherto shy and 
unavowed species of " beautiful souls " has grown 
intoxicated in contemporary Germany, the species 
anarchistica within the educated proletariate). 
T he "co ntemplative" are a hundred times worse 
— I never knew anything which produced such 
intense nausea as one of those " objective " chairs^ 
one of those scented mannikins - about - town 
of history, a thing half-priest, half-satyr (Renan 
parfuni), which betrays by the high, shrill falsetto 
of his applause what he lacks and where he lacks 
it, who betrays where in this case the Fates have 
plied their ghastly shears, alas ! in too surgeon- 
like a fashion ! This is distasteful to me, and 
irritates my patience ; let him keep patient at such 
sights who has nothing to lose thereby, — such a 
sight enrages me, such spectators embitter me 
against the " play," even more than does the play 
itself (history itself, you understand) ; Anacreontic 
moods imperceptibly come over me. This Nature, 
who gave to the steer its horn, to the lion its 
Xaay! oSovTcov, for what purpose did Nature give 
me my foot ? — To kick, by St. Anacreon, and 
not merely to run away ! To trample on all the 

* E.ff. Lectureships. 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 205 

worm-eaten " chairs," the cowardly contemglators, 
tEe lascivious "eunuchs ^history, the .flir±er&„with^ 
ascetE"T(3eals,)the righteous hypocrites of im^ 
potenSTj All reverence on my part to the ascetic 
ideal, tn so far as it is honourable ! So long as 
irtielieves in Itseli" and plays no pranks on us ! 
But I like not all these coquettish bugs who have 
an ' msati ate aiiTWtitm-"iT]r^ mell"~of'T he jflfinjte7- 
until eventually the infinite smells of bugs ; I like 
not the whited sepulchres with their stagey re- 
production of life ; I likenot_the_,iii:gd_and^ the 
used up who wra p the mselves in wisdom and look 
'£oH^^^21^ like not the agitators dressed up 
as B&oes, who hide their dummy-heads behind the 
stalking-horse of an ideal ; I like not the ambitious 
artists who would fain play the ascetic and the 
priest, and are at bottom nothing but tragic 
clowns ; I like not, again, these newest speculators 
in idealism, the Anti-Semites, who nowadays roll 
their eyes in the patent Christian-Aryan-man-of- 
honour fashion, and by an abuse of moralist atti- 
tudes and agitation dodges, so cheap as to exhaust 
any patience, strive to excite all the blockhead 
elements in the populace (the invariable success 
of every kind of intellectual charlatanism in 
present-day Germany hangs together with the 
almost indisputable and already quite palpable 
desolation of the German mind, whose cause I 
look for in a too exclusive diet, of papers, politics, 
beer, and Wagnerian music, not forgetting the 
condition precedent of this diet, the national 
exclusiveness and vanity, the strong but narrow 
principle, " Germany, Germany above every- 



206 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

thing,"* and finally the paralysis agitans of 
" modern ideas "). Europe nowadays is, above 
all, wealthy and ingenious in means of excite- 
ment; it apparently has no more crying necessity 
than stimulantia and alcohol. Hence the enormous 
counterfeiting of ideals, those most fiery spirits of 
the mind ; hence too the repulsive, evil- smelling, 
perjured, pseudo - alcoholic air everywhere. I 
should like to know how many cargoes of imita- 
tion idealism, of hero-costumes and high falutin' 
clap-trap, how many casks of sweetened pity 
liqueur (Firm : la religion de la souffrance), how 
many crutches of righteous indignation for the help 
of these flat-footed intellects/liow many comedians 
of the Christian moral ideal would need to-day 
to be exported from Europe, to enable its air to 
smell pure againj It is obvious that, in regard 
to this over-production, a new trade possibility 
lies open ; it is obvious that there is a new 
business to be done in little ideal idols and 
obedient " idealists " — don't pass over this tip ! 
Who has sufficient courage? We have in our 
hands the possibility of idealising the whole earth. 
But what am I talking about courage ? we only 
need one thing here — a hand, a free, a very free 
hand. 

27. 

Enough ! enough ! let us leave these curiosities 
and complexities of the modern spirit, which excite 
as much laughter as disgust. Our problem can 

* An allusion to the well-known patriotic song. — H. B. S 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 207 

certainly do without them, the problem of the 
meaning of the ascetic ideal — what has it got to 
do with yesterday or to-day ? those things shall 
be handled by me more thoroughly and severely 
in another connection (under the title " A Contribu- 
tion to the History of European Nihilism," I refer 
for this to a work which I am preparing: The 
Will to Power, an Attempt at a Transvaluation 
of All Values). The only reason why I come to 
allude to it here is this : the ^cetic ideal has at 
times, even in the most intellgctuaLapherey^only 
one real^^^;,of«iOTdes_jjTdj/«»2«^^rj„;,„ these are_ 



the comedians of this ideal — for they awake mis- 
trust. PLyerywhere otherwi^j_w]^£g_the_ mind Is 
at work seriously, powerfully, and without counter- 
feiting, it dispenses altogether now wjth_an ideal 
(the pSpnlar expression for this abstinence is 
" Atheism ") — with the exception of the will for\ 
truth. But this will, this7i?iw«5«/'"of ^fTTdeal, is. 
It you win believe~me, 'fEaF ideal itself in its 
severest and cleverest formulation, esoteric through 
and through, stripped of all outworks, and conse- 
quently not so much its rernnant as its kernel. 
UnqualiHed honest atheism (and its air only'cTo 
we breathe, we, the most intellectual men of this 
age) is not op posed to that ideal, to the extent 
that "it appears to be; it is rather one of the final 
p hases of its evolution , one of its syllogisms and , 
pieces of inherent logic — it _is the awe-inspiring 
catastrophe of a two-thousand-year training ini 
truth, Which"Trnally forbids itself the lie of the 
^e[ief~in'God. l^The same course of development 
m india-^quite independently, and consequently 



208 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

of some demonstrative value — the same ideal 
driving to the same conclusion the decisive point 
reached five hundred years before the European 
era, or more precisely at the time of Buddha — 
it started in the Sankhyam philosophy, and then 
this was popularised through Buddha, and made 
into a religion.) 

What, I put the question with all strictness, 
has really triumphed over the Christian God? 
The answer stands in my Joyful Wisdom, Aph. 
357: " the Christian morality itself, the idea of 
truth, taken as it was with increasing seriousness, 
the confessor-subtlety of the Christian conscience 
translated and sublimated into the scientific con- 
science into intellectual cleanness at any price. 
Regarding Nature as though it were a proof of 
the goodness and guardianship of God ; interpret- 
ing history in honour of a divine reason, as a con- 
stanF proof"6r~armbfal order of the world and a 
moral teTeology : explaining our own personal ex- 
periences, as pious men have for long enough ex- 
plained them, as though every arrangement, every 
nod, every single thing were invented and sent 
out of love for the salvation of the soul ; all this 
is now done away with, all this has the conscience 
'Sgainst^-^^ a«d-is— regardeJ" By every subtler con- 
science~as' disreputable, dishonourableTasTying, 
feminism, w^akness,~cbwai^ice-^-^by"tneans of tliis 
severity, if by means of anything at all, are we, 
in sooth, good Europeans and heirs of^ Europe's 
longest and bravest self-mastery." . . 1 All great 
things go to ruin by reasoji of themselves, by reason 
ofiaiTact of self-dissolution : so wills the law of life, 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS Y 209 

the law of nece ssary " self-masitery:-'Leven.Jn the 
essence oOife-^^ver is the law-giver finally ex- 
pbsedToThe^cry, " patere legem quam ipse tulisti" ; 
in thus wise did Christianity go to ruin as a dogma, 
through its own morality^ Tn 'tFus wise must 
Christianity go" again to ruin to-day "as~a~m6rality 
-^Wfe are standing on tRe lfhfeshold o f this evenj^ 
lX?te r^Christian _ truthfulness has^ drawn, oiie in- 
clusion after the other, i t finally draws i ts strongest 
cdndaston^'^s'^ncXusiow against itself; this, how- 
BV5i7 happensTwhen it puts the question, "jsihat is 
the meaning of every will for truth V^ And here 
again do I touch on my problem, on our problem, 
my unknown friends (for as yet / know of no 
friends) : what sense has our whole being, if it 
does not 'mean that in our own selv^that wTT 
15r tr uth has'co'Hrg 'to its "o wn consciousness a s 
problem}- — By reason of this attainment 
""consciousness'Tifi th e part of the wTTT _ 

fiiorality Irom henceforward— ;4here js no doub t 
about It — goes to pieces : this is that great 
hundfeJ-act play that is reserved for the next two 
centuries of Europe, the most terrible, the most 
mysterious, and perhaps also the most hopeful of 
all plays. ~~ ~" 

28. 

If you except the ascetic ideal, man, the animal 
man had no meaning. His existence on earth 
contained no end ; " What is the purpose of man 
at all ? " was a question without an answer ; the 
will ior man and the world was lacking; befilnd 
every great human destiny rang as a refrain a still 




2IO -\ THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

! 

■gUgater " Vanity ! " The ascetic ideal s impW 
means this rffiaFsomething was lacking, that^ 
trenrentfous^T^^ encircled man — he did not know" 
how to justify himself, to explain himself, to afHrni 
himself, Tie suffered Trom the problem'of his owir 
memimg. He sufTered also in other ways, he wai 
in the main a diseased animal ; but_Jiispro^leiH_^ 
was not suffering itself, but the lack of an answer 
to ~that~cryrng~questibri," " ~To'wEatpurpose^sP^^ 
suffer ? " \ Man7 the bravest animal and l:lie~one 
most inured to suffering, does not repudiate suffer ing 
in itself : he wills it, he even seeks it out, provIHed 
that he is shown a meaning for it, a purpose of 
su ffering. (T^- A^'i'^ suffering , but the senselessness of 
suffering was the curse whichtin_then lay spread 
over humanity — -and the ascetic ideal gave~ii~a 
meaning !l ~rF was up till then the only meaning; 
but any meaning~is~BeReF than no meaning; the 
Ascetic ideaFwas in that connection the "fdute de 
■mieux" par excellence that existed at that time. 
In that ideal suffering found an explanation ; the 
tremendous gap seemed filled ; the door to all 
suicidal Nihilism was closed. The explanation — 
there is no doubt about it — brought in its train 
new suffering, deeper, more penetrating, more 
venomous, gnawing more brutally into lifeOt 
brought all suffering under the_perspective oT" 
"g ml t; b Pt'tn" spite of^ all that — ;man was saved 
the'reby7Tle'^d a meaning, and from henceforth 
vfantS'Tnore like a leaf in the wind, a shuttle- 
cock of chance, of nonsense, hejcould now " will " 
somethingj— absolutely immaterial to what end, 
to what purpose, with what means he wished : 



WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS ? 211 

the will itself was saved. It is absolutely impos- 
sible to disguise what in point of fact is made 
clear by every complete will that has taken its 
direction from the ascetic ideal : this hate of thel 
human, and even more of the animal, and more 
still of the material, this horror of the senses, of 
reason itself, thi s fear of hap pin ess and b eauty,] 
this desire to g et right away from all illusion,! 
change, growth, death, wishing and even desiring 
— airthis means- — -let us have the courage to 
grasp it — a will for Nothingness, a wi ll oppose d 
to life, a repudiation of the most fundam ental 
. condifiohs ot_lite, but it is an d remains a wi ll ! — i 
and Td" say at the end that which I said at thej 
beginning-pman will w ish Nothingnes s jaX\^t\\^ 
not wish at oK] 



PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. 

Translated by J. M. KENNEDY. 



[The following twenty-seven fragments were intended by 
Nietzsche to form a supplement to Chapter VIII. oi Beyond 
Good and Evil, dealing with Peoples and Countries.] 



The Europeans now imagine themselves as re- 
presenting, in the main, the highest types of men 
on earth. 



A characteristic of Europeans : inconsistency 
between word and deed ; the Oriental is true to 
himself in daily life. How the European has 
established colonies is explained by his nature, 
which resembles that of a beast of prey. 

This inconsistency is explained by the fact that 
Christianity has abandoned the class from which 
it sprang. 

This is the difference between us and the 
Hellenes: their morals grew up among the 
governing castes. Thucydides' morals are the 
same as those that exploded everywhere with 
Plato. 

Attempts towards honesty at the Renaissance, 
for example : always for the benefit of the arts. 
Michael Angelo's conception of God as the 
"Tyrant of the World" was an honest one. 



2l6 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 



I rate Michael Angelo higher than Raphael, 
because, through all the Christian clouds and 
prejudices of his time, he saw the ideal of a 
culture nobler than the Christo - Raphaelian : 
whilst Raphael truly and modestly glorified only 
the values handed down to him, and did not carry 
within himself any inquiring, yearning instincts. 
Michael Angelo, on the other hand, saw and felt 
the problem of the law-giver of new values : the 
problem of the conqueror made perfect, who first 
had to subdue the " hero within himself," the man 
exalted to his highest pedestal, master even of his 
pity, who mercilessly shatters and annihilates 
everything that does not bear his own stamp, 
shining in Olympian divinity. Michael Angelo 
was naturally only at certain moments so high 
and so far beyond his age and Christian Europe • 
for the most part he adopted a condescending 
attitude towards the eternal feminine in Christi- 
anity ; it would seem, indeed, that in the end he 
broke down before her, and gave up the ideal of 
his most inspired hours. It was an ideal which 
only a man in the strongest and highest vigour of 
life could bear ; but not a man advanced in years ! 
Indeed, he would have had to demolish Christi- 
anity with his ideal ! But he was not thinker 
and philosopher enough for that. Perhaps 
Leonardo da Vinci alone of those artists had a 
really super-Christian outlook. He knows the 
East, the " land of dawn," within himself as well 
as without himself. There is something super- 



PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. 217 

European and silent in him : a characteristic of 
every one who has seen too wide a circle of things 
good and bad. 

4- 

How much we have learnt and learnt anew in 
fifty years ! The whole Romantic School with 
its belief in " the people " is refuted ! No Homeric 
poetry as " popular " poetry ! No deification of 
the great powers of Nature ! No deduction from 
language-relationship to race-relationship ! No 
" intellectual contemplations " of the supernatural ! 
No truth enshrouded in religion ! 

The problem of truthfulness is quite a new one. 
I am astonished. From this standpoint we regard 
such natures as Bismarck as culpable out of care- 
lessness, such as Richard Wagner out of want of 
modesty; we would condemn Plato for his pia 
fraus, Kant for the derivation of his Categorical 
Imperative, his own belief certainly not having 
come to him from this source. 

Finally, even doubt turns against itself: doubt 
in doubt. And the question as to the value of 
truthfulness and its extent lies there. 



5. 

What I observe with pleasure in the German is 
his Mephistophelian nature ; but, to tell the truth, 
one must have a higher conception of Mephis- 
topheles than Goethe had, who found it necessary 
to diminish his Mephistopheles in order to magnify 
his "inner Faust." The true German Mephis- 



2l8 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

topheles is much more dangerous, bold, wicked, 
and cunning, and consequently more open-hearted: 
remember the nature of Frederick the Great, or 
of that much greater Frederick, the Hohenstaufen, 
Frederick li. 

The real German Mephistopheles crosses the 
Alps, and believes that everything there belongs 
to him. Then he recovers himself, like Winckel- 
mann, like Mozart. He looks upon Faust and 
Hamlet as caricatures, invented to be laughed at, 
and upon Luther also. Goethe had his good 
German moments, when he laughed inwardly at 
all these things. But then he fell back again 
into his cloudy moods. 



Perhaps the Germans have only grown up in a 
wrong climate ! There is something in them that 
might be Hellenic ! — something that is awakened 
when they are brought into touch with the South — 
Winckelmann, Goethe, Mozart. We should not 
forget, however, that we are still young. Luther 
is still our last event ; our last book is still the 
Bible. The Germans have never yet " moralised." 
Also, the very food of the Germans was their 
doom : its consequence, Philistinism. 

7- 

The Germans are a dangerous people: they 

are experts at inventing intoxicants. Gothic, 

rococo (according to Semper), the historical sense 

and exoticism, Hegel, Richard Wagner — Leibniz, 



PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. 219 

too (dangerous at the present day) — (they even 
idealised the serving soul as the virtue of scholars 
and soldiers, also as the simple mind). The 
Germans may well be the most composite people 
on earth. 

" The people of the Middle," the inventors of 
porcelain, and of a kind of Chinese breed of Privy 
Councillor. 

8. 

The smallness and baseness of the German 
soul were not and are not consequences of the 
system of small states ; for it is well known that 
the inhabitants of much smaller states were proud 
and independent : and it is not a large state per 
se that makes souls freer and more manly. The 
man whose soul obeys the slavish command : 
" Thou shalt and must kneel ! " in whose body 
there is an involuntary bowing and scraping to 
titles, orders, gracious glances from above — well, 
such a man in an " Empire " will only bow all the 
more deeply and lick the dust more fervently in 
the presence of the greater sovereign than in the 
presence of the lesser: this cannot be doubted. 
We can still see In the lower classes of Italians 
that aristocratic self-sufficiency ; manly discipline 
and self-confidence still form a part of the long 
history of their country : these are virtues which 
once manifested themselves before their eyes. A 
poor Venetian gondolier makes a far better figure 
than a Privy Councillor from Berlin, and is even 
a better man in the end — any one can see this. 
Just ask the women. 



220 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

9- 

Most artists, even some of the greatest (in- 
cluding the historians) have up to the present 
belonged to the serving classes (whether they 
serve people of high position or princes or women 
or " the masses "), not to speak of their dependence 
upon the Church and upon moral law. Thus 
Rubens portrayed the nobility of his age; but 
only according to their vague conception of taste, 
not according to his own measure of beauty — on 
the whole, therefore, against his own taste. Van 
Dyck was nobler in this respect : who in all those 
whom he painted added a certain amount of what 
he himself most highly valued : he did not descend 
from himself, but rather lifted up others to him- 
self when he " rendered." 

The slavish humility of the artist to his public 
(as Sebastian Bach has testified in undying and 
outrageous words in the dedication of his High 
Mass) is perhaps more difficult to perceive in 
music ; but it is all the more deeply engrained. 
A hearing would be refused me if I endeavoured 
to impart my views on this subject. Chopin 
possesses distinction, like Van Dyck. The dis- 
position of Beethoven is that of a proud peasant ; 
of Haydn, that of a proud servant. Mendelssohn, 
too, possesses distinction — like Goethe, in the 
most natural way in the world. 

lo. 

We could at any time have counted on the 
fingers of one hand those German learned men 



PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. 221 

who possessed wit: the remainder have under- 
standing, and a few of them, happily, that famous 
"childlike character" which divines. ... It is 
our privilege : with this " divination " German 
science has discovered some things which we can 
hardly conceive of, and which, after all, do not 
exist, perhaps. It is only the Jews among the 
Germans who do not " divine " like them. 



II. 

As Frenchmen reflect the politeness and esprit 
of French society, so do Germans reflect some- 
thing of the deep, pensive earnestness of their 
mystics and musicians, and also of their silly 
childishness. The Italian exhibits a great deal 
of republican distinction and art, and can show 
himself to be noble and proud without vanity. 



12. 

A larger number of the higher and better- 
endowed men will, I hope, have in the end so 
much self-restraint as to be able to get rid of their 
bad taste for affectation and sentimental darkness, 
and to turn against Richard Wagner as much as 
against Schopenhauer. These two Germans are 
leading us to ruin ; they flatter our dangerous 
qualities. A stronger future is prepared for us in 
Goethe, Beethoven, and Bismarck than in these 
racial aberrations. We have had no philosophers 
yet 



222 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

13- 

The peasant is the commonest type of noblesse, 
for he is dependent upon himself most of all. 
Peasant blood is still the best blood in Germany 
— for example, Luther, Niebuhr, Bismarck. 

Bismarck a Slav. Let any one look upon the 
face of Germans. Everything that had manly, 
exuberant blood in it went abroad. Over the 
smug populace remaining, the slave-souled people, 
there came an improvement from abroad, especially 
by a mixture of Slavonic blood. 

The Brandenburg nobility and the Prussian 
nobility in general (and the peasant of certain 
North German districts), comprise at present the 
most manly natures in Germany. 

That the manliest men shall rule : this is only 
the natural order of things. 

14. 

The future of German culture rests with the 
sons of the Prussian officers. 

15- 

There has always been a want of wit in 
Germany, and mediocre heads attain there to the 
highest honours, because even they are rare. 
What is most highly prized is diligence and per- 
severance and a certain cold-blooded, critical out- 
look, and, for the sake of such qualities, German 
scholarship and the German military system have 
become paramount in Europe. 



PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. 223 

16. 

Parliaments may be very useful to a strong and 
versatile statesman : he has something there to 
rely upon (every such thing must, however, be 
able to resist !) — upon which he can throw a great 
deal of responsibility. On the whole, however, I 
could wish that the counting mania and the 
superstitious belief in majorities were not estab- 
lished in Germany, as with the Latin races, and 
that one could finally invent something new even 
in politics ! It is senseless and dangerous to let 
the custom of universal suffrage — which is still 
but a short time under cultivation, and could 
easily be uprooted — take a deeper root : whilst, 
of course, its introduction was merely an expedient 
to steer clear of temporary diiificulties. 



17- 

Can any one interest himself in this German 
Empire ? Where is the new thought ? Is it only 
a new combination of power ? All the worse, if 
it does not know its own mind. Peace and laisser 
aller are not types of politics for which I have 
any respect. Ruling, and helping the highest 
thoughts to victory — the only things that can 
make me interested in Germany. England's 
small-mindedness is the great danger now on 
earth. I observe more inclination towards great- 
ness in the feelings of the Russian Nihilists than 
in those of the English Utilitarians. We require 
an intergrowth of the German and Slav races, and 



224 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

we require, too, the cleverest financiers, the Jews, 
for us to become masters of the world. 

(a) The sense of reality. 

(b) A giving-up of the English principle of the 
people's right of representation. We require the 
representation of the great interests. 

(c) We require an unconditional union with 
Russia, together with a mutual plan of action 
which shall not permit any English schemata to 
obtain the mastery in Russia. No American 
future ! 

(d) A national system of politics is untenable, 
and embarrassment by Christian views is a very 
great evil. In Europe all sensible people are 
sceptics, whether they say so or not. 

i8. 

I see over and beyond all these national wars, 
new " empires," and whatever else lies in the fore- 
ground. What I am concerned with — for I see it 
preparing itself slowly and hesitatingly — is the 
United Europe. It was the only real work, the 
one impulse in the souls, of all the broad-minded 
and deep-thinking men of this century — this 
preparation of a new synthesis, and the tentative 
effort to anticipate the future of " the European." 
Only in their weaker moments, or when they grew 
old, did they fall back again into the national 
narrowness of the " Fatherlanders " — then they 
were once more "patriots." I am thinking of 
men like Napoleon, Heinrich Heine, Goethe, 
Beethoven, Stendhal, Schopenhauer. Perhaps 



PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. 225 

Richard Wagner likewise belongs to their number, 
concerning whom, as a successful type of German 
obscurity, nothing can be said without some such 
" perhaps." 

But to the help of such minds as feel the need 
of a new unity there comes a great explanatory 
economic fact: the small States of Europe — I 
refer to all our present kingdoms and " empires '' — 
will in a short time become economically un- 
tenable, owing to the mad, uncontrolled struggle 
for the possession of local and international trade. 
Money is even now compelling European nations 
to amalgamate into one Power. In order, how- 
ever, that Europe may enter into the battle for 
the mastery of the world with good prospects of 
victory (it is easy to perceive against whom this 
battle will be waged), she must probably " come 
to an understanding " with England. The English 
colonies are needed for this struggle, just as much 
as modern Germany, to play her new rdle of 
broker and middleman, requires the colonial 
possessions of Holland. For no one any longer 
believes that England alone is strong enough to 
continue to act her old part for fifty years more ; 
the impossibility of shutting out homines novi 
from the government will ruin her, and her con- 
tinual change of political parties is a fatal obstacle 
to the carrying out of any tasks which require to 
be spread out over a long period of time. A man 
must to-day be a soldier first and foremost that he 
may not afterwards lose his credit as a merchant. 
Enough; here, as in other matters, the coming 
century will be found following in the footsteps of 
P 



226 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

Napoleon — the first man, and the man of greatest 
initiative and advanced views, of modern times. 
For the tasks of the next century, the methods of 
popular representation and parliaments are the 
most inappropriate imaginable. 



19- 

The condition of Europe in the next century 
will once again lead to the breeding of manly 
virtues, because men will live in continual danger. 
Universal military service is already the curious 
antidote which we possess for the effeminacy of 
democratic ideas, and it has grown up out of the 
struggle of the nations. (Nation — men who speak 
one language and read the same newspapers. 
These men now call themselves " nations,'' and 
would far too readily trace their descent from the 
same source and through the same history ; which, 
however, even with the assistance of the most 
malignant lying in the past, they have not suc- 
ceeded in doing.) 

20. 

What quagmires and mendacity must there be 
about if it is possible, in the modern European 
hotch-potch, to raise questions of "race" ! (It being 
premised that the origin of such writers is not in 
Horneo and Borneo.) 

21. 

Maxim : To associate with no man who takes 
any part in the mendacious race swindle. 



PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. 227 

22. 

With the freedom of travel now existing, 
groups of men of the same kindred can join 
together and establish communal habits and 
customs. The overcoming of " nations." 

23- 

To make Europe a centre of culture, national 
stupidities should not make us blind to the fact 
that in the higher regions there is already a con- 
tinuous reciprocal dependence. France and Ger- 
man philosophy. Richard Wagner and Paris 
(1830-50). Goethe and Greece. All things 
are impelled towards a synthesis of the European 
past in the highest types of mind. 

24. 

Mankind has still much before it — how, gener- 
ally speaking, could the ideal be taken from the 
past? Perhaps merely in relation to the present, 
which latter is possibly a lower region. 

25- 

This is our distrust, which recurs again and 
again ; our care, which never lets us sleep ; our 
question, which no one listens to or wishes to 
listen to ; our Sphinx, near which there is more 
than one precipice : we believe that the men of 
present-day Europe are deceived in regard to the 
things which we love best, and a pitiless demon 



228 THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. 

(no, not pitiless, only indifferent and puerile) — 
plays with our hearts and their enthusiasm, as it 
may perhaps have already played with everything 
that lived and loved ; I believe that everything 
which we Europeans of to-day are in the habit of 
admiring as the values of all these respected 
things called "humanity," "mankind," "sym- 
pathy," "pity," may be of some value as the 
debilitation and moderating of certain powerful 
and dangerous primitive impulses. Nevertheless, 
in the long run all these things are nothing else 
than the belittlement of the entire type "man," 
his mediocrisation, if in such a desperate situation 
I may make use of such a desperate expression. 
I think that the commedia umana for an epicurean 
spectator-god must consist in this : that the 
Europeans, by virtue of their growing morality, 
believe in all their innocence and vanity that they 
are rising higher and higher, whereas the truth 
is that they are sinking lower and lower — i.e. 
through the cultivation of all the virtues which 
are useful to a herd, and through the repression 
of the other and contrary virtues which give rise 
to a new, higher, stronger, masterful race of men 
— the first-named virtues merely develop the herd- 
animal in man and stabilitate the animal " man," 
for until now man has been " the animal as yet 
unstabilitated." 



26. 

Genius and Epoch. — Heroism is no form of 
selfishness, for one is shipwrecked by it. . . . The 



PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. 229 

direction of power is often conditioned by the 
state of the period in which the great man happens 
to be born ; and this fact brings about the super- 
stition that he is the expression of his time. But 
this same power could be applied in several 
different ways ; and between him and his time 
there is always this difference : that public opinion 
always worships the herd instinct, — i.e. the instinct 
of the weak, — while he, the strong man, fights for 
strong ideals. 

27. 

The fate now overhanging Europe is simply 
this: that it is exactly her strongest sons that 
come rarely and late to the spring-time of their 
existence ; that, as a rule, when they are already 
in their early youth they perish, saddened, dis- 
gusted, darkened in mind, just because they have 
already, with the entire passion of their strength, 
drained to the dregs the cup of disillusionment, 
which in our days means the cup of knowledge, 
and they would not have been the strongest had 
they not also been the most disillusionised. For 
that is the test of their power — they must first of all 
rise out of the illness of their epoch to reach their 
own health. A late spring-time is their mark of 
distinction ; also, let us add, late merriment, late 
folly, the late exuberance of joy ! For this is the 
danger of to-day : everything that we loved when 
we were young has betrayed us. Our last love — 
th & love which makes us acknowledge he r^_our 
lo ve for T ruth — let us take care that she, too, 
does not betray~u sT~~ 



Printed by 

Morrison & Gibb Limited 

Edinburgh 



THE WORKS OF 

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 

First Complete and Authorised English Translation, in i8 Volumes 

Edited by Dr, OSCAR LEVY 

I. THE BIRTH OFTRAGEDY. Translated by William 

A. Haussmann, B.A.,Ph.D., with Biographical Introduction by 
the Author's Sister, Portrait and Facsimile. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. net. 

Second Edition. 

n. EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY AND OTHER 

ESSAYS. Translatedby M. A. MOgge, Ph.D. 3s.6d.net. 

III. THE FUTURE OF OUR EDUCATIONAL 

INSTITUTIONS. Translated by J. M. Kennedy. 2s. 6d. net. 

Second Edition. 

IV. THOUGHTS OUT OF SEASON, Vol. I. Trans- 

lated by A. M. LuDOVici, with Editorial Note. 2S. 6d, net. 

Second Edition. 

V. THOUGHTS OUT OF SEASON, Vol. II. Trans- 
lated, with Introduction, by Adrian Collins, M.A. as. 6d. net. 

Second Edition. 

VI. HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN, Vol. I. Translated by 
Helen Zihmern, with Introduction by J. M. Kennedy. 5s. net. 

Second Edition. 
VII. HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN, Vol. II. Translated, 
with Introduction, by Paul V. Cohn, B.A. 5s. net. 

VIII. THE CASE OF WAGNER : We Philologists, &c. 

Translatedby A. M, LuDOVici. Cr. 8vo, 3s. 6d. net. Third Edition. 

IX. THE DAWN OF DAY. Translated, with Intro- 

duction, by J. M. Kennedy. 5s. net. 
X. THE JOYFUL WISDOM. Translated, with Intro- 

duction, by Thomas Common. 5s. net. 
XI, THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA. Revised Trans- 
lation by T. Common, with Introduction by Mrs, Foerster-Niet- 
zscHE, and Commentary by A- M. Ludovici. 6s. net. Second Ed. 

XII. BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL. Translated by Helen 

ZiMMERN, with Introduction by T. Common. 3s.6d.net. Third Ed. 

Xni. THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS. Translated by 
Horace B. Samuel, M.A,, with Introductory Note. 3s. 6d. net. 

XIV. THE WILL TO POWER, Vol. I. Translated, with 
Introduction, by A. M. Ludovici. 5s. net. Second Edition. 

XV. THE WILL TO POWER, Vol. II. Translated, with 

Introduction, by A. M. Ludovici. 5s. net. 

XVLTHE TWILIGHT OF IDOLS, THE ANTI- 
CHRIST, &c. Translated by A. M. Ludovici. Cr. 8vo, 5s. net. 
XVII. ECCE HOMO AND POETRY. Translated by A. M. 

Ludovici. Crown 8vo, 6s. net. 

XVIII. INDEX TO WORKS, by Robert Guppy ; and 

Vocabulary of all Foreign Words and Phrases, by Paul V. Cohn ; 
prefaced by an Essay on the Nietzsche Movement in England, by 
Dr. Oscar Levy. 450 pp. Crown 8vo, 6s. net 

T. N. FOULIS, PUBLISHER 

91 GT. RUSSELL ST., LONDON, &" 15 FREDERICK ST.. EDINBURGH 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

THE RENAISSANCE 

By COUNT ARTHUR DE GOBINEAU 

Translated by Paul V. Cohn, with an Introductory 

Essay by Dr. Oscar Levy 

"js. dd. 
(Heinemann) 
(/« the Press) 

These five historical dramas cover the flowering-time of the Italian 
Renaissance from the rise to prominence of Savonarola (1492) to the 
last days of Michaelangelo (about 1560). While grouped round the 
leading figures who provide the titles — Savonarola, Cesare Borgia, 
Julius II., Leo X., and Michaelangelo — the plays introduce almosi 
every interesting character of the period. Nor are we only con- 
cerned with the great names : the author aims at catching the spiril 
of the people, and the thoughts and feelings of soldier, artisan, 
trader, and their womenfolk find ample voice in his pages. 

The Italian Renaissance is an epoch of peculiar interest to English 
readers, not least because of its profound influence on our own 
Elizabethan age. It is perhaps the most many-sided period in 
history : even fifth-century Greece scarcely contributed so much— 
or at any rate so much that has survived — to the world of politics, 
art, and thought. Now while this interest is amply reflected in 
contemporary literature, from the monumental work of Symonds 
down to the flotsam and jetsam of everyday fiction, there is one kind 
of man who more than an historian would show insight into this 
age, and that is a poet. 

It is as a poet's work that Gobineau's " Historical Scenes" recom- 
mend themselves to the public. But there are many kinds of poets : 
there is the religious and moral kind, there is the irreligious and 
submoral kind, and there is the super-religious and super-moral 
kind. Only the last-named can understand, can feel, can sympathise 
with such mighty figures as Cesare Borgia and JuUus II. — the 
religious poet being inclined to paint them as monsters, the sub- 
religious as freaks and neurotics. Similia similibus: equals can 
only be recognised by their equals, and Gobineau was himself a type 
of the Renaissance flung by destiny into an age of low bourgeois and 
socialist ideals. In a century swayed by romanticism and democracy, 
Gobineau was a classic and an aristocrat. He is a forerunner of 
Nietzsche (" the only European spirit I should care to converse with," 
said Nietzsche of him in a letter), and as such is peculiarly fitted 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

to deal with one of the few periods that was not dominated by the 
moral law. For this reason Gobineau cannot fail to attract the large 
and ever-growing circle of students of Nietzsche in this country and 
America. 

Although Gobineau, especially in his masterly touches of irony, 
is a thorough Frenchman, he has not attracted in his own country, 
even since his death in 1881, the attention he deserves. This is 
mainly due to his anti-republican and anti-patriotic bias. In Ger- 
many, on the other hand, his work has created great stir : of " La 
Renaissance" alone there are no fewer than four different trans- 
lations, and acting versions have been and still are produced with 
success. We may hope that England — of late years not behindhand 
in welcoming continental authors — will to some extent follow the 
example of her Teutonic sister-nation. At any rate, the work of 
Gobineau does not lack a distinguished English sponsor — one who 
was no less a discerning critic than a great creative artist. George 
Meredith writes (in a letter to Mrs. J. G. Butcher, Feb. 27th, 
1906, : " I return the book of the Comte de Gobineau, I have not 
for long read anything so good. The Renaissance in its chief ruler 
and the ideas and character of the time is made alive. So much 
has the writer impressed me that I sent for ' Histoire des Perses,' an 
expose of his political notions." 



NIETZSCHE : HIS LIFE AND 
WORKS 

By ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI 

Preface by Dr. Oscar Levy 

103 pages, \s. net 

(Constable & Co) 

In this short monograph on Nietzsche, the latest addition 
to Messrs. Constable's Shilling " Philosophies, Ancient and 
Modem" series, Mr. Ludovici not only gives the reader a 
succinct account of the philosophy of the " Will to Power " in 
all its main features ; but he also sketches in bold strokes the 
groundwork of an attack on Darwin, Spencer, English Materi- 
alism, and English Utilitarianism, which is perhaps the first 
criticism of the kind ever attempted from a Nietzschean 
standpoint. 

Q 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 



NIETZSCHE AND ART 

BY 

ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI 

4^. bd. 

(Constable & Co) 

Not only to the Nietzsche enthusiast, but also to th 
art student, this book ought to be of particular value am 
interest, seeing that it is the first attempt that has eve 
been made, either in English or any Continental language 
to apply Nietzsche's Esthetic to one of the branches o 
Art. 

In this work the reader will find all the matter includei 
in Mr. Ludovici's stimulating course of lectures recentl; 
delivered at University College, Gower Street, and a goo( 
deal more besides. " I have done two things," says th( 
author in his preface ; " I have given a detailed accoun 
of Nietzsche's general art doctrine, and I have alsi 
applied this doctrine to the graphic arts of to-day an( 
of antiquity." 

To quote the Daily TelegrapKs report of the lectures 
Mr. Ludovici's thesis is simply this : " The finest art 
or the ruler art, as he calls it, is that in which thi 
aristocratic principles of culture, selection, precision, anc 
simplicity are upheld, and this art can be the flowe 
and product only of a society in which an aristocratii 
order is observed. 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

THE MASTERY OF LIFE 

By G. T. WRENCH 

x^s. net 

(Stephen Swift) 

This book is a review of the history of civilisation with the 
object of discovering, in the phrase of Nietzsche, "under 
what conditions and where the plant man flourished best." 
The review shows that the patriarchal family has always 
been the foundation of peoples who have been distinguished 
for their joy in and power over life, and have expressed their 
joy and power in art works which have been their peculiar 
glory and the object of admiration and wonder of other 
peoples. On the other hand, peoples who have not based 
themselves on the larger humanity of patriarchalism, and 
who have not cultivated a masterful aristocracy, have been 
distinguished by a weaker and often miserable attitude 
towards life, and by an expression, not of power, joy, and 
quality, but of exhaustion, pessimism, and doubts about the 
objects of existence. 

The author contrasts the two types of peoples, the orderly 
and artistic, and the dehumanised or mechanical, and shows 
how the latter may hope to attain to the mastery of life, both 
social and individual. But to carry out the change of social 
basis and values, a new kind of men is needed, and this need 
leads the author in the last pages to advocate as an essential 
preliminary the self-culture of power and will which Nietzsche 
taught so brilliantly through the mouth of Zarathustra. 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

RELIGIONS AND 
PHILOSOPHIES OF THE EAST 



J. M. KENNEDY 

Author of " The Quintessence of Nietzsche " 

Crown %vo, 6s. net 

" All wisdom came from the East," and all the wisdom oi 
the East is bound up in its religions and philosophies, the 
earliest forms of which can be traced back 3000 years B.C. 
Mr. J. M. Kennedy has now aimed at giving in a single 
volume a concise history of the religions and philosophies 
which have influenced the thought of the great eastern 
nations, special emphasis, of course, being laid upon the 
different religions which have swayed the vast empire of 
India. A feature of the book is a section dealing with the 
influence of the philosophies of the East upon those of 
the West, so far as materials are now available for our 
guidance in this respect. It may be remembered, for ex- 
ample, that Schopenhauer was greatly influenced by Indian 
thought, and that he exercised much influence on Nietzsche, 
who, in his turn, as shown in Mr. Kennedy's " Quintessence 
of Nietzsche," has not only swayed modem thought, but is 
in addition likely to affect the whole trend of philosophy 
for many generations to come. 

T. WERNER LAURIE, CLIFFORD'S INN, LONDON 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

THE PHILOSOPHY 
OF FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 

By H. L. MENCKEN 

Demy 8vo, ys. 6d. net 

(Fisher Unwin) 

A popular exposition of Nietzsche's ideas, showing their 
application to current problems, together with an account of 
his life, and chapters upon his origins and influence. 

"An admirable manual. "—Dr. W. L. Courtney, in the Daily 
Telegraph. 

" One of the most interesting and instructive books that has come 
from the American press in many a long day. Mr. Mencken can 
write. In addition, he has something to write about." — Educational 
Review. 

" A clear exposition, in vigorous, straightforward language, and a 
really interesting and thoughtful biographical memoir."— 0«</«oi. 

"A very readable and clear account of the philosophy and the 
philosopher." — New York Sun. 



MEN 1^5. THE MAN 

By ROBERT RIVES LAMONTE and 
H. L. MENCKEN 

\2mo, 251 pages, $1.35 net 

(Henry Holt & Co., New York) 

A series of actual letters between a prominent American 
Socialist and a Nietzschean Individualist. An earnest and 
lively debate. 

"No more brilliant and entertaining work has appeared in many 
years." — Wilshir^s Magazine. 

" An epistolary duel between two well-equipped champions." — 
International Socialist Review. 

"Mencken's thinking and Mencken's writing delight me. I like 
to see him hammer the dunces, the scholiasts, the hired bombasticos 
of the pulpit and the lecture-room."— Percival Pollard, in Town 
Topics, 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

ON THE TRACKS OF LIFE 

THE IMMORALITY OF MORALITY 

Translated from the Italian of Leo G. Sera by 
J. M. Kennedy 

With an Introduction by Dr. Oscar Levy 

7^. 6d. net 
(John Lane) 

Dr. Sera is a physician who has deeply studied literature 
and historical science, and the object of his book is, in the 
opening words of the preface : " To establish our conception 
of social life on its original basis." The author adduces 
many new and startling theories in regard to the questions he 
treats of in support of his views. He holds that the diffusion 
of democratic principles is vulgarising science and art, and 
that present social conditions, especially work and Christian 
teaching, are leading to the intellectual and moral degen- 
eration of the race. Stimulating chapters on Stendhal, 
Nietzsche, Goethe, The Origin of Society, Work, and the 
Aristocratic Ideal, show current opinions of Genius, Aristo- 
cracy, Democracy, Sport, and Sexuality in a new light. 
Scientific thought is put upon a new basis more in conformity 
with modem Continental views. The audacity of Dr. 
Sera's theories has evoked much discussion in England and 
on the Continent ; and his work is certain to appeal to all 
serious thinkers, and to students of modern moral problems. 

" There are a host of points which Dr. Sera makes which it would 
be well if our social conventionalists would consider. For one 
thing, his philosophy is based on what men really do and think, as 
apart from their professions." — Sunday Times. 

" Written with a vigour and freshness rarely met with in works of 
this character, few readers could peruse the volume without intel- 
lectual quickening and expansion. — Western Morning News, 

"A vigorously written bit of work, packed full of shrewd 
thinking, " — Birmingham Post. 

" The volume contains many obiter dicta of great shrewdness, 
and of particular value to our own race." — Globe. 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
HIS LIFE AND WORK 

By M. A. MtJGGE, Ph.D. 

10^. 6d. (Third Edition) 

(Fisher Unwin) 

To those who have already perused Dr. Miigge's valuable 
book the advent of a third edition will be more than welcome. 

The detailed and fascinating story of Nietzsche's life forms a 
fitting prelude to the scholarly sketch of the brilliant poet- 
philosopher's works comprising the second part of the volume. 
The author's keen critique, combined with his absolutely just 
and unbiassed appreciation of Nietzsche's contribution to 
philosophical thought, furnishes delightful reading in the third 
part, which portrays the lonely genius as philosopher, poet 
and prophet. 

Almost invaluable to the student of Nietzsche is the com- 
plete and accurate bibliography, at present the most reliable 
compendium of English and foreign literature on this subject 
obtainable. 

The book supplies a long-felt want, and fulfils most admir- 
ably the author's aims, as stated in his preface, viz., " the 
introduction of the philosopher and his philosophy to those 
unacquainted with either"; and, "to gain for Nietzsche some 
appreciation and justice in the English-speaking world, 
where he is so little known, and, when not unknown, so often 
misunderstood." 



PRESS CRITICISMS. 

"Undoubtedly the best work on Nietzsche in English.'' — Wesiminster Gazette. 

" The most useful Nietzsche book yet published in English." — Literary World . 

"An interesting and exhaustive book." — Review of Reviews, 

" Welcomed by all lovers of literature. " — Daily Telegraph. 

" A very useful work ; there is nothing like it in English." — Morning Post. 

" Herr Mugge has written a book specially for English readers. And certainly 
nothing could be better for the purpose." — Labour Leader. 

"There are few Englishmen capable of writing the life of Nietzsche and 
explaining his philosophy with the clearness achieved by Mr. Mugge." 

Liverpool Daily Post and Mercury. 

"The best work on Friedrich Nietzsche in our xon%\x^."~Dundee Advertiser. 

"An educated and temperate account of a most unhappy man of genius." 

Guardian. 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

THE QUINTESSENCE OF 
NIETZSCHE 

By J. M. KENNEDY 

37° PP-1 ^^- ^^^ 
(T. Werner Laurie) 

This book is valuable as giving not only the first full 
account in English of Nietzsche's complete works, includ- 
ing the recently published writings and fragments, but 
also as the first application of the German philosopher's 
principles to English politics, the Church of England, 
Socialism, Democracy, and to British Institutions in 
general. The pubhcation of the fragmentary works and 
letters has thrown new light on Nietzsche's opinions 
concerning love, woman, and marriage, all of which are 
referred to or cited in the course of the work. Quotations 
are given from all Nietzsche's writings, no work of the 
philosopher being left unmentioned. For the chapters 
dealing with Nietzsche's life, studies, travels, etc., ample 
use has been made of the newly issued autobiography, 
" Ecce Homo," from which several quotations are given. 

The volume is tastefully illustrated, and is further pro- 
vided with a short bibliography and a full index. 



NIETZSCHE IN OUTLINE AND APHORISM. By 

A. R. Orage, Editor of TJie New Age. 176 pages. Fcap. 8vo, 
2S. (A. net. (T. N. FouLis.) 
" Mr. Orage has made his selection with care and judgment. His book gives 
an excellent summary of Nietzsche's teaching, which many will be glad to 
possess." — Nation. 

NIETZSCHE, The Dionysian Spirit of the Age. By A. R. 

Orage. With Portrait. 83 pages. Crown 8vo, boards, is. neL (T. N. 
FouLls.) 
" This little book on Nietzsche is badly wanted in England . . . very inter- 
esting and readable." — Fabian News. 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

THE GOSPEL OF SUPERMAN 

Translated from the French of 
Prof. HENRI LICHTENBERGER 

With an Introduction 

BY 

J. M. KENNEDY 

Extra crown 8vo, 232 pages, 55. net 

Although three or four English works dealing with 
Nietzsche's philosophy have appeared in the course of the 
last few years, it is but natural that the complex personality 
of such a many-sided character cannot yet be said to have 
been thoroughly examined and discussed. Prof. Lichten- 
berger's book, while containing sections which form a good 
introduction to Nietzsche's philosophy, aims at giving the 
reader a clear insight into the philosopher's psychology ; and 
his success may be inferred from the fact that the book is 
now in its fourteenth French edition, and has been translated 
into German by Mrs. Foerster-Nietzsche. Nietzsche's de- 
scent and early training, his studies, his "intellectual 
emancipation," and his philosophical message, are all fully 
discussed, while the results of recent research are admirably 
summed up in the appendix, which, with a good bibliography, 
completes the work. 

T. N. FOULIS, PUBLISHER 

91 GT. RUSSELL ST., LONDON, 6- is FREDERICK ST., EDINBURGH 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

WHO IS TO BE MASTER OF 
THE WORLD? 

An Introduction to the Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche 
By A. M. LUDOVICI 

With a Preface by Dr. Oscar Levy 

Crown Sw, 216 pages, 2s, 6d. net 
(T. N. FouLis) 

In this book the author has made a plain and lucid 
statement of Nietzsche's views. The work embodies the 
Three Lectures recently given at University College, 
London, and other matter besides — together with copious 
references to the numerous philosophers, historians, and 
scientists who may be said to have led up to Friedrich 
Nietzsche's position. 

" The lectures are well worth reading, as showing what Nietzsche- 
anism really means." — Glasgow Herald. 

" If this little book does not impel some young and gallant spirits 
to the works of the philosopher, I shall be surprised. . . . Mr. 
Ludovici shows such clearness, method, constructive art, as belong 
to a master of exposition." — Westminster Gazette. 

THE REVIVAL OF ARISTOCRACY 

By Dr. OSCAR LEVY 

35. dd. net 

(Probsthain) 

A fierce indictment of the philosophy of the nineteenth 
century, and of the events which led to it. Special chapters 
are devoted to Napoleon, Stendhal, Goethe, and Nietzsche. 

"The ablest exposition of Nietzscheanism that has yet appeared." 
— Manchester Guardian. 

" Here we see the philosophy of Nietzsche put into a concentrated 
form, and set forth by a clever and biting pen." — Glasgow Herald, 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

ENGLISH LITERATURE 
(1880-1905) 

By J. M. KENNEDY 

7^. (>d. net 

(Stephen Swift) 

The history of English Literature in the last generation 
constitutes one of its most fascinating periods, not merely for 
the historian, but also, and in a much greater degree, for the 
psychologist. The two great features of the middle and 
later Victorian era, viz., Puritanism and Materialism, may be 
said to have reached their climax about 1880, and their effect 
is still felt on English Literature even at the present day. 
By applying certain Nietzschean principles of literary, artistic, 
and psychological criticism to the period in question, 
Mr. J. M. Kennedy has shown how our modern writers have 
been influenced, consciously or unconsciously, by the two 
characteristics referred to. His book deals, from a psycho- 
logical as well as a literary standpoint, with such well-known 
writers as Wilde, Davidson, Shaw, Wells, and Fiona 
Macleod, together with several authors who, although 
influential in their particular circle, are less known to the 
general public, such as Gissing and Ernest Dowson. As a 
guide to many puzzling tendencies in recent English litera- 
ture, the book forms an invaluable document. 

The name of the brilliant young writer has become widely 
known in a comparatively short time by his vivid and racy 
criticism of English politics, the English Church, and English 
Literature. Mr. Kennedy was one of the first of English 
critics to recognise the necessity of breaking with last 
century's liberal and romantic traditions. He has in all his 
books tried to provide the Tory party, which allowed itself 
likewise to be infected by the spirit of the age, with a sound 
basis of new ideas and principles. 



THE LIFE OF FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 

VOLUME ONE 

THE YOUNG NIETZSCHE 

By FRAU FOERSTER-NIETZSCHE 
Translated by ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI 
Royal %vo. With portraits. Price i^s. net 
(Heinemann) 
In an age given to a general tendency of levelling up and 
down, it is particularly interesting to show the psychological 
and spiritual development of genius, because it has been the 
tendency to belittle the divine element among us. A first- 
hand account of the life of a man of undoubted genius — 
undoubted even by his enemies and detractors — must be of 
interest. 

Frau Foerster-Nietzsche is admirably supplied with first- 
hand documents and evidence, having from childhood col- 
lected everything concerning her brother, who was only two 
years her senior. Her method is perhaps best shown in the 
following paragraph : 

" From the days of my earliest childhood I always regarded my 
brother as the highest authority. . . . But this reverence which I 
showed for Fritz and which, throughout my childhood and youth 
brought me a lot of teasing and chaff — for at heart I am not a 
believer in authority — certainly had one excellent practical result 
in the shape of the Nietzsche archives, the extraordinary rich 
contents of which have been collected by myself alone. From a 
very early age I have always kept a treasure-drawer, in which I 
preserved whatever I could get hold of that happened to come 
from my brother's pen, and had been discarded by him. And if 
from the first he had not been so fond of burning things, and had 
not occasionally made such raids upon my precious hoard, not one 
of his compositions from the time he was eight years old would now 
be missing ; for when I was only six, though I attached but slight 
importance to my own things, I had already started this collection 
of my brother's productions." 
The present publication is based on a larger one of several 
volumes, issued shortly after Nietzsche's death, and incorpor- 
ating the posthumous works. Though published in connec- 
tion with the Collected Edition in Germany, it was felt that 
it was unfit for translation, and the posthumous works have 
since been published independently. The biography itself 
appears now for the first time, simultaneously in German and 
in English ; and Frau Foerster-Nietzsche has kindly added to 
the English book some photographs of Nietzsche at different 
times of life, of his birthplace, and his friends, which have not 
appeared elsewhere and are not even included in the original. 
Vol. II. THE SOLITARY NIETZSCHE 
to appear shortly. 



OTHER NIETZSCHEAN LITERATURE 

"NIETZSCHE" 

By PAUL ELMER MORE 

Price f I 

(Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1912) 

This book, which is not written by an admirer but a critic 

of Nietzsche, will be welcome to the reader as an independent 

opinion on a much ventilated subject. The author's attempt to 

place Nietzsche in the history of philosophy and to compare his 

works with that of other writers, f.i. Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, 

and the Romantics, is novel and interesting. 

The book, somewhat revised, likewise appears in the eighth 
volume of the author's Shelburne Essays, published by the same 
firm. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
NIETZSCHE 

An Exposition and an Appreciation 

By Dr. G. CHATTERTON-HILL 

7^. dd. 

(John Odsbley, Ltd., 1913) 

In this absorbing work Dr. Chatterton-Hill has produced the 
most readable exposition of the philosopher's teaching that has yet 
been available for the general reader. 

The student commencing the serious consideration of Nietzsche's 
doctrine, the casual reader wishing to gain some intelligent notion 
of the philosophy of the " Will to Power " and of the " Superman," 
the lover of good literature desirous of enjoying the entrancing 
beauty of Nietzsche's style, have in this book a competent and 
indispensable guide. 



NIETZSCHE: SEIN LEBEN UND 
SEINE WERKE 

By RICHARD M. MEYER 

M.io; bound, M.T.2.e,o. Pp. 702 

(Oscar Beck, Munich, 1913) 

This generous appreciation of Nietzsche by the famous German 

professor, who ranks as the first literary critic of his country, 

should be welcome to all English students conversant with the 

German tongue. 



PUBLISHER'S ANNOUNCEMENT 

As this Nietzsche translation is now completed, the pub- 
lisher begs to suggest to that part of the public which takes 
the lead in matters of taste and intellect, that these volumes 
should not be wanting in the library of any cultured person. 
The antagonism to Nietzsche's teaching, which first took the 
form of icy silence and afterwards that of violent contradiction, 
has considerably diminished since his real meaning has be- 
come more generally known through this translation. The 
opinion is now gaining ground that in Nietzsche's life-work a 
totally new standpoint in matters of politics, art, literature, 
and theology is to be found. Even his enemies now readily 
acknowledge that Nietzsche at leastwrote in an extraordinarily 
vigorous and bracing style — a style which distinguishes him 
from all dry-as-dust philosophers, especially those of German 
origin. As the Yorkshire Weekly Post oi loth June 191 1 has 
it ; — " He stands out in the foggy firmament of German 
thought like a bright particular star. With the possible ex- 
ception of Heine and Schopenhauer, no one has wielded the 
German language to better effect. . . ." 

The translations have won high praise from press and 
public. They have been written by scholars thoroughly 
conversant with the German tongue, who have spared 
no pains in rendering Nietzsche's passionate and poetic 
style in adequate English. Valuable and original introduc- 
tions are added to each of the volumes, giving all particulars 
as to dates, circumstances, Nietzsche's development, &c., so 
that each volume may be bought separately. 

An exhaustive index, such as exists in none of the 
numerous translations, and not even in the German original, 
has been added as a fitting coping-stone to what the Liver- 
pool Courier has called " this monumental translation." 

T. N. FOULIS, PUBLISHER 

I GT. RUSSELL ST., LONDON &= 15 FREDERICK ST., EDINBURGH 


